<p> Lucas said he conceived the Star Wars saga's story in the form of a plot outline in 1973. However, he later clarified that, at the time of the saga's conception, he had not fully realized the details—only major plot points. The film's climactic duel has its basis in the Return of the Jedi novelization, in which Obi-Wan recounts his battle with Anakin that ended with the latter falling "into a molten pit". Lucas began working on the screenplay for Episode III before the previous film, Attack of the Clones, was released, proposing to concept artists that the film would open with a montage of seven battles on seven planets. In The Secret History of Star Wars, Michael Kaminski surmises that Lucas found flaws with Anakin's fall to the dark side and radically reorganized the plot. For example, instead of opening the film with a montage of Clone War battles, Lucas decided to focus on Anakin, ending the first act with him killing Count Dooku, an action that signals his turn to the dark side. </p>

<p> One of Solo’s biggest surprises is Phantom Menace baddie Darth Maul popping up as Crimson Dawn’s shadowy leader, looking a few decades older and sporting a nifty pair of robotic legs. The character’s not been seen on the big screen since 1999, though his survival was chronicled in Dave Filoni’s animated Star Wars TV shows. When Howard stepped into the director’s chair it still wasn’t decided who the big boss would be – but he was pushing for it to be Maul (no longer ‘Darth’). “They had a list of a few candidates, and they even talked about just inventing a new gangster boss because there are five Syndicates,” he explained. “I said, 'Maul, what happened to him?' I hadn't seen the animations but I knew more had happened with him. They told me the story and I said, well wouldn't that be cool? My 30-year-old son thinks that’s the coolest guy, and so I admittedly lobbied. It wasn't entirely my decision but I thought that was a pretty scary way to go and a way to give our third act a nice twist and a jolt of recognition and excitement. The first time I saw it with fans, I saw that it was a good call." </p>

<p> Instead of jetting off with Han in the Falcon at the end of the film, Qi’ra sticks around on Dryden Vos’ space-yacht for a quick space-Skype with Maul. The scene’s been interpreted by some as a power-grab move, but Howard sees it differently. "In my mind, she knew she couldn't run off with Han. It would be his death and hers,” he reckons. “She set him up to go, assuring him that she'd follow, but knowing she couldn't really. She had to clean this situation up as best as she could. I think she hoped she could report in and then disappear, but [Maul] trapped her. He said, 'Come to Dathomir and we're going to be working closely together', and you realise, 'Oh my god, she's traded one oppressive boss in for an even scarier dude'. In a way it fuels her ambition and puts her in a position of heightened power, perhaps. Or heightened danger. I thought it was kind of courageous for her." </p>

<p> One of the characters we know changed considerably from Lord and Miller’s initial shoot is Paul Bettany’s baddie Dryden Vos. Not only was he originally played by Michael K. Williams, who was recast when unable to return for the reshoots, but the character was initially a feline alien creature. Bettany’s version is humanoid, but not entirely human – as evidenced by the markings (not scars) on his face which change to reflect his feelings. “The idea that the facial striations would intensify and diminish depending on his mood came after the [shoot] because Paul's performance was so mercurial and interesting in the way he would flare up and then be charming,” revealed Howard. “That was suggested a little bit in the script, but mostly generated out of Paul's creativity. He was also so handsome and charismatic that we wanted to make him a little scarier, and actually went back and added the scene where you can see him hands-on killing a governor […] He's like one of those animals that changes colors and can't help it, like a mood stone." </p>

<p> For the last 40 years, all we’ve known of the Kessel Run is that Han did it in the Falcon in less than 12 parsecs. In Solo we learn that it’s a treacherous trade route swirling with asteroids, a black hole, and a big tentacled beastie (fun fact: that thing’s called a summa-verminoth). But it wasn’t always that way. "The monster wasn't around when I arrived,” Howard revealed. “It was a new addition. There were a lot of the elements of the Kessel Run that were scripted and already previs-ed and so forth, but there was a lot of ongoing evolution of the story. Even using the Coaxium as a factor in the ultimate escape was something that just evolved through this incredible process […] I was in and out of the Falcon three times shooting new versions to facilitate new fun ideas that we were getting about the sequence. Directorially I just had a blast […] I didn't expect to have so much fun working on the action set-pieces." </p>

<p> The clever thing about Star Wars Episode VIII: The Last Jedi is that it takes these questions seriously, and it has a lot of tongue-in-cheek fun with them, too. In an early scene, Luke himself asks why anyone would assume that a man with a laser sword could turn the tide against a fascist army, and the film, written and directed by Rian Johnson (Brick, Looper) keeps prodding and pulling at its own mythos with the same irreverent spirit and enquiring mind. All the monolithic concepts that have been the foundation stones of the Star Wars saga are chipped away. The Force, the Jedi, good, evil, destiny, family, self-sacrifice, war itself ... are any of them what they’re cracked up to be? The most intelligent film in the franchise by several light years, The Last Jedi can be seen as the space-opera equivalent of Clint Eastwood’s revisionist western, Unforgiven, in that it pours scorn on its hero’s legendary reputation - but it eventually gives us the satisfaction of seeing why he acquired that legendary reputation in the first place. </p>

<p> Still, as 23 different characters say during the course of the film: don’t give up hope. Like last year’s interstitial Star Wars adventure, Rogue One, The Last Jedi is redeemed by its crowdpleasing final third. It’s at this late stage that Johnson delivers the epic spectacle and the balletic fight scenes we have been waiting for, as well as the most whiplashing twists of any Star Wars film. Soulfully acted by Adam Driver, arch-emo Kylo Ren confirms that he is more interesting and unpredictable than any other character in the new trilogy, if not the whole trilogy-of-trilogies. And Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis) - seen here in the computer-generated flesh, and not just as a hologram - proves himself to be a deliciously loathsome villain, even if, with a name like ‘Snoke’, he should probably have been the floppy-snouted alien comic relief. Most impressively of all, The Last Jedi becomes a thoughtful and touching examination of what the Star Wars phenomenon means to its fans. By the time it gets to its closing dedication to Carrie Fisher, who died while the film was in post-production, it is clear that it is something special. </p>

<p> 20 years later, Jyn is seen locked up in an Imperial jail. A Rebel operative Cassian Andor (Diego Luna) finds out that an imperial pilot Bodhi Rook (Riz Ahmed) has defected to the Rebel Alliance with important information. Rook surrenders himself to one of Saw Gerrara&rsquo;s goons, who takes him to Saw's hideout where he relays the message. While getting rescued by the rebel force, Jyn tries to escape only to be stopped by a reprogrammed Imperial droid K-2SO (Alan Tudyk), who takes her to the rebellion headquarters. Jyn discovers that her father has sent a message to Saw Gerrera through the defected imperial pilot and she needs to intercept it as Saw had a fallout with the rebellion and wouldn&rsquo;t hand over the message to them easily. While leaving for Saw Gerrera&rsquo;s hideout, Cassian receives a Rebel order to assassinate Galen Erso on sight. Soon after Cassian, Jyn and K-2SO land on Jedha in their hunt for Gerrera, they get involved in an ambush of Imperial Forces by Saw&rsquo;s extremist group. While fighting for their lives, Jyn and Cassian encounter Chirrut &Icirc;mwe (Donnie Yen) and Baze Malbus (Wen Jiang) a couple of clerics from a destroyed temple protecting Kaiburr crystals, a valuable source of energy. The Empire has been mining these crystals from Jedha to power the Death Star space station. After fending off an attack from the Imperial forces, Jyn and the group get captured by Saw Gerrara&rsquo;s goons and are thrown into their barracks. Here, Jyn confronts Saw for deserting her and leaving her behind to fend for herself as a young girl. Saw convinces her that he did so only because he believed she needed to stay hidden from the Empire's gaze. He then tells her the message delivered by the pilot is from her father. Jyn and Saw watch the holographic message where Galen tells them that he was responsible for the delays in the construction of the Death Star. He explains that he intentionally left a weakness, which can be exploited to bring down the space station with a well-placed missile attack. As they&rsquo;re going through the message, Director Orson Krennic, commences to test the Death Star on the city of Jedha. Jyn and the team manage to escape thanks to Cassian and K-2SO&rsquo;s ship who rescues them just as the city is being turned on its head. Gerrera chooses to stay behind, thus getting destroyed along with the city. </p>

<p> Meanwhile Director Krennic is told by Grand Moff Tarkin that Galen Erso had leaked the Death Star schematics to the rebellion forces via the defected pilot. Director Krennic decides to handle the situation himself by paying Galen a visit. Cassian along with the rest of the group crash land near the imperial Base where Galen Erso is stationed. Cassian and Bodhi venture out to find an Imperial spaceship they can use to escape, as their ship is irreparably damaged in the crash. Chirrut senses something is amiss, making Jyn anxious about her father&rsquo;s well-being. She tries to catch up with Cassian and Bodhi, but when she sees her father at the Imperial base being threatened by Krennic, she chooses to protect him herself. Meanwhile, Cassian sets up to take a sniper shot and kill Galen Erso. However, he hesitates and is unable to execute the order. The Rebellion forces learn that Cassian&rsquo;s ship has crashed and since they are cannot get in touch with them, the commander sends in a squadron to assassinate Galen Erso and finish the mission. While Krennic is confronting Galen Erso, he is stopped by Jyn and the attacking rebellion forces. In the crossfire, Galen Erso gets hit with a rebellion torpedo blast. As Krennic escapes, Jyn manages to see her father one last time before he succumbs to his wounds. </p>

<p> Director Krennic visits Lord Darth Vader to update him on the progress of the Death Star&rsquo;s construction, and tries to assert his position within the Empire. Darth Vader uses his force choke, warning him to not to &lsquo;choke on his aspirations&rsquo; and he better get the situation under control. Krennic decides to get all the transmissions sent by Galen from the Scarif base. Devastated, Jyn returns to the rebel base at the headquarters where the commanders argue over the authenticity of Galen&rsquo;s message and whether to disperse their troops or to stand and fight. Jyn tries to convince them to join forces and attack the Scarif base to retrieve the Death Star plans but the commanders cannot put their trust in her as she&rsquo;s the daughter of a &lsquo;criminal&rsquo; leader. Jyn storms out of the headquarters, only to find Cassian waiting for her along with few rebellion soldiers who are ready to strike the base with or without the permission of the commanders. So, Jyn along with Cassian, Bodhi, K-2SO, Chirrut, Baze and the rest of the soldiers board the stolen imperial spaceship and give it the call sign &lsquo;Rogue One&rsquo;. They head to the Imperial base to retrieve the plans of the Death Star. The moment Jyn and the team land at Scarif, they manage to intercept the landing party. Jyn along with Cassian and K-2SO disguise themselves in Imperial force uniforms. Chirrut and Baze along with the rest of the soldiers create a distraction for them to infiltrate the Scarif base without getting detected. Bodhi tries to set up a signal strong enough for the rebellion forces to receive the transmission. As the battle commences, the Rebel base receives word of the attack. The Rebel commanders realize it&rsquo;s Jyn and decide to deploy their troops to support them. The trio manages to reach the tower where all the data is stored on hard disks. K-2SO manages to track down the location of the Death Star disk, but they also get discovered in the bargain. Jyn and Cassian need to physically retrieve the disk by climbing the tower, as K-2SO stays behind to defend them. The Imperial forces manage to damage the droid enough to shut him down. Director Krennic who is already on the base, realizes that the Death Star plans are at risk and sets out to stop the Rebels himself. He encounters Jyn and Cassian as they are scaling the together, wounding Cassian enough for him to fall below. Meanwhile, Chirrut & Baze are tasked with deactivating a shield to allow the transmission of data out of the base. Bodhi establishes the signal connection but is blown apart by an Imperial grenade blast. Being flanked by Imperial troops, Chirrut summons the power of the Force and manages to single handedly flip the switch but is killed in the bargain. Baze kill several troops before he himself is shot. As the shield is deactivated, the Rebel forces can now enter the base. Jyn reaches the top of the tower where the antenna needs to be aligned to transmit the data to the Rebel alliance. As she&rsquo;s doing so, Krennic also reaches the top and begins firing at her just as she&rsquo;s about to activate the transmission. At gunpoint, Jyn revels her identity as Galen&rsquo;s daughter and Krennic is about to pull the trigger when Cassian appears, to fatally wound him. However, the Death Star itself appears at the base under Grand Moff Tarkin&rsquo;s orders to take out the Rebel troops and prevent the plans leaving the base. Jyn manages to transmit the data to a Rebel ship just as the Death Star fires at Scarif. The wounded Jyn and Cassian manage to help each other to a beach nearby as the Death Star&rsquo;s destructive wave sweeps them away. The remaining rebel ships are intercepted by the Imperial starships and the ship having the plans is boarded by Darth Vader who swiftly kills the Rebel troops using his light saber and the power of the Force. However, the troops manage to pass on the data to Princess Leia, thereby connecting the film to the events of &lsquo;Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope&rsquo;. </p>

<p> Loved the video. As for the Whole New Canon and old Canon thing regarding Nightsisters. In the old EU, there was a planet called Dathomir where a coven of witches lived. These witches were semi force sensitives as a way to survive in their hostile environment. As such, being a dense forest world they were overlooked as a civilized planet and developed their own force "magics". There were only a few characters to come from this era, the best known one being Silri, who was a full on force user. Rancors were also native to the planet, as well as other tribes like the Spider Tribe. Then TCW came along (Per usual) and bulldozed everything that came before it, turning the planet into a dead planet and giving the witches actual magic. They also made it so they enslaved the Zabrak who before weren't native at all to dathomir. They also ruined the race of Asajj Ventress who before was a Rattataki. They just retconned the entire Rattataki species to be night sisters instead. Where as before they were clearly just a subspecies of humans. In conclusion, TCW should be considered Disney Canon and not EU material as it just ruins everything that came before it with little to no regard as to what the significance of it was. On top of that I'm tired of seeing the puppatered corpses of things from the EU brought into canon like the Dark Troopers and the Mythosour. They just bring them back without caring or knowing what made them cool or special to begin with and it ruins the legacy those things left behind. Fuck Disney Star Wars. Thank you for coming to my TED Talk. </p>

<p> You are incorrect. There isn't a zero ability to recover data from RAM. RAM data can be recovered in some cases if they get to it fast enough, even after power has been lost. It takes time for the data to clear, which can be seconds up to minutes depending on circumstances (and cooling the ram to very low temperatures increases the available time). And it will be "corrupted" because certain bits might have degraded before others or stuff might be at unlabelled places in the memory, making piecing data together quite difficult. Yes, it will take an expert to do, and only works if people are basically standing at the ready to instantly extract the RAM, but it is not impossible. Considering that a captured droid is quite the security risk, adding some safe guards to prevent data extraction a sane thing to do. And just in case you're not interested in googling it for yourself, this is what wikipedia has to say about cold boot attacks: "The attack relies on the data remanence property of DRAM and SRAM to retrieve memory contents that remain readable in the seconds to minutes following a power switch-off." </p>

<p> 46:29 I think this criticism is a bit unfair. The USSR of George Lucas's youth and adolescence was already post-Stalin and its Orwellian purges. Yes, the citizens of the USSR enjoyed fewer rights against the state than westerners, and development was uneven. But most Russians would have enjoyed a similar standard of living to westerners at that time, there was a comfortable middle class, and the ruthless authoritarianism of Stalin had already been denounced by Kruzchev, and his speech widely leaked to the West. The West also wasn't exactly looking like a paragon of freedom itself given the Vietnam war draft, the injustices remedied by the civil rights movement, etc. George himself would have been making movies at the time of the Brezhnev deténte in the 70s, a period of relative East-West amity, and the Soviet Union at the time legitimately had been very innovative in cinematic art. We're talking about the country that invented many of the terms and techniques used in modern filmmaking, and produced genius auteur directors like Tarkovsky. Meanwhile, in context Lucas's comments here were in criticism of the regimented studio system in the US, which was in its own way stultifying, bureaucratic, and stagnant. In other words "If we're so much freer, why is the creation of art still so centrally controlled?" Lucas and the New Hollywood cohort went on to revolutionize filmmaking with their innovative blockbusters, becoming successful businessmen, pioneering new technologies, and creating film as we know it today. They weren't closet Communists who wanted the government to control art or something. I think Lucas can easily be forgiven for his sympathy for Soviet filmmakers given the time period, and I think it's pretty disingenuous to act like those comments were meant to express support for purges, famines, or mass killings. It would be like saying someone who admires Turkish mosque architecture because they think it's "more spiritual" than Western art is implicitly a supporter of the Armenian genocide. </p>

<p> The main three issues are simple. 1) Every female MC is a discount Rey. They never are blamed except by the villains. They master and learn things which shouldn't be possible and they can never die. Sabine - lightsaber gut. Walks it off the next episode after a nap. Ashoka - she was either dead, alive, but drowned, or whatever excuse you want when she got sent over the cliff. Reva - multiple lightsaber stabs. 2) the female characters all follow the same rules and archetype. They must never show emotion least it make them look bad or show a flaw. They must never have a flaw. They must never be called out on a flaw. Ashoka - gets an entire apprentice who is making the same mistakes as her mentor did causing him to fall to the dark side. She shrugs it off and laughs even when it might doom the Republic. Sabine - ignores basic story telling... Even had the set up about her one choice which could be seen as bad... Swept under the rug... Three times... For each different reason including the ones she changed the conversation to as if they had it in the script before, but had to cut it out. Giving up the map, thinking Ashoka died, having to ask the villains for a ride home. Each point was brought up and then immediately dropped because some executive thought it might make Sabine look bad if it was addressed. Reva - torture children, murdered children, killed adults, tortured adults, and tried to murder everyone for a misplaced grudge she blames someone else for because he was in a war sent by their government on the opposite side of the galaxy. Instant redemption because she couldn't beat two hillbillies with blasters... And failed to kill a child. That isn't redemption... That is confirming everyone else claiming she is a joke. Storm troopers did a bitter job than she did! The new Republic captain - does what Poe did only fails. Has shown the new republic is corrupt. Has entire scene where she lost ships, failed her mission, and being held by court marshal to both punish her and show why the new Republic failed. Executive burst into the room screaming and now last minute save by another female character sending a message to pat her in the back and remove all charges. Poe does the same and wins and gets demoted. A female does the same, but loses... Gets praised if not promoted. 3) Writing is getting lazy or restrictions to write anything are getting worse. Episode four surprised everyone because a star wars female lost... It should not be that surprising. Basic logic tossed out for the final episode because the enemy must lost and yet must also win. So it is amazing at how hard they try to make an enemy losing as if it was a series final... And yet also having to remember they are required to win. If the heroes don't care then why should we? Check they laugh at the end not even bothered by the fact they have doomed their galaxy. </p>

<p> I just want to take this time to harp on one contrivance in the show, because I think it is illustrative of how poorly written of an obvious first draft the entire show is: When the baddies leave the galaxy with their sinister space ring, Ahsoka immediately, conveniently manages to catch a pod of space whales right then and there so she can head off in hot pursuit. Setting aside how contrived and deus machina this is, it completely deflates any notion that this other galaxy is so very hard to reach when there are two viable means to get there mere minutes apart from each other. Worse still, it wastes a perfectly good setup for a side quest where the heroes have to scramble to figure out how they are going to get to the other galaxy, travel there and acquire it, all the which provide ample opportunity to explore and develop the characters, especially considering the team is split up and they have legitimate doubts about and grievances against Sabine. I think any half-decent tv writer would have had at least two episodes, at bare minimum, where we follow around team Ahsoka as they eventually settle on the completely insane plan of space-whale-travel (ideally after exploring all other options), and finally make it to the other galaxy. You could cut in scenes with the two not-sith and Sabine, but honestly I think it would make more sense to only show what happened in the other galaxy once Ahsoka gets there. Jumping between galaxies is immersion-breaking and ruins the sense of separation between the two. By only showing scenes from whatever galaxy Ahsoka is in, you'd subconsciously reinforce the impression that the other galaxy is unreachably distant. </p>

<p> I'm 100% convinced Matrock or whatever that inquisitor's name is, was *supposed* to be Ezra. I think Filoni planned for him to be Ezra, I think the original story's intent was for him to be Ezra, and this was to be used as a device to build up Ahsoka's and Sabine's girl boss forcelationship. But, as Dave got to the end of his script, he realized he wanted Ahsoka to ride in like Gandalf durning Helm's Deep for his Mandoverse movie, AND he wants Sabine to be a full "badass" jedi by then as well and she can't do that if Ahsoka sends Sabine home since, in his mind, Ahsoka is the only one who could possibly train her (Luke WHOwalker?) So, the inquisitor was rewritten to not be Ezra. They made him a goofy gas boy so Ezra can be Legolas in Helm's Deep, and Ahsoka can be Gandalf. Mando will probably be Gimly. He'll turn to Ezra and be like "I never thought I'd be going into battle with a Jedi..." then Ezra will turn to him and say "How about... with a friend?" then Mando will nod, then, probably, get licked by some disgusting CGI wolf-esque monster that Ezra has tamed and it'll be a very funny haha moment, because you see, it is a gross beast showing affection to a stoic character. That is funny, you see. This, of course, means Thrawn and his undead army will be both The Night King and the Orcs, and he will be beaten by the messiac return of Ahsoka the White, avatar of the grey force which shall be painted as objectively better than any other side of the force because KOTOR 2 was written by a guy who hated Star Wars so much without really understanding any of it, but people really LIKE Kotor 2 so, it will be given the lipservice in that moment to justify why Ahsoka truly is the most powerful bestest most terrific jedi to ever live of all time ever. </p>

<p> It's very rare that I see someone noting Kotor 2 for what it is and not what their 14yr-old brain remembers it as being. I thought it was amazing and genius when I first played it, not unsurprisingly at around the same age I read the Communist Manifesto and thought it was amazing and genius. Think about it for a second as an adult and you realize even entirely within the context of the story, Kreia really was just a bitter old hag using moral relativism as an excuse to be evil. Like everyone else who can't shut up about how the good guys do bad stuff sometimes too, she has infinite criticisms and zero solutions, endless motivation to destroy the current tradition and none to build something better in its place. I find it very odd how everyone memes Palpatine's obviously evil speech about "good is only a point of view" yet will turn around and call Kreia a deep, morally complex character for saying the same thing for the same damn reason (creating an excuse to justify being evil) with fancier words. All that the story ever successfully critiques is Bioware's "be jesus or satan and nothing in between" moral choice system from the first game. Story aside though, gameplay was a marked improvement over the first. </p>

<p> @@samwellcheck562 I (in)famously hate Chris Avalone's writing by and large. Chris didn't like Starwars to begin with, and KOTOR 1 was probably the epitome of everything he hates ABOUT Starwars. It is a *very* simple plot about good vs. evil, where the good guys range between good to close-minded by well-intentioned and the bad guys are cartoonishly evil, petty, violent people. So he made a game where he got to self insert as a grumpy old lady who preaches all the things Chris feels, and some things he doesnt feel. He's been quoted as saying that *after* doing KOTOR 2 he had a deeper appreciation for Starwars, which suggests to me he got something off his chest during the experience, but I digress. My point is, a lot of people really like that Kreia exists to yell at the Jedi for being dumb, something that the player has likely been doing the whole game, because the jedi are *very* dumb in Kotor 2, even MORE so than in Kotor 1. It's very cathartic to have a character who is able to eloquently, succinctly, and *venomously* tear down your enemies for you. It makes Kreia interesting in that she's a sith, very plainly, who isn't a world sucking space demon. Her plan to *KILL THE FORCE* is no less cartoonishly villainous, her philosophy of "don't help people, don't be good, but don't be total psycho mega evil either, only help people when doing so is something you can directly, demonstrably, and definitively benefit from." is *just* as moronic as the Jedi she lambasts. It's also blatantly evil. "Dont help that homeless man, idiot! He's gonna get beat up because of you! Don't you see?! HELPING PEOPLE ISNT HELPING! You need to let them help themselves! They help themselves or they die!" is an interesting thing to say for a person who, in the same breath, will tell you that the best way to grow is to face adversity. Don't get me wrong, I enjoy Kriea, as a character, is a hypocritical, spiteful, emotional old lady. Having your ultimate antagonist be your mentor through the whole journey is a very cool idea, especially so when your interactions with them arent wholly antagonistic. You *understand* them as a person, your fight is not one where it's like "You foolsish fool! You believed me to your friend? Not so! For twas I who was am the Big Baddo all along! Now die!" it's a moment of "I understand you, I understand your motives, I *can't* let you go through with this, and I know you won't stop because of what we are to eachother. I'm sorry." That's a good moment. That's a good character. But the game itself isnt satisfied with letting Kreia be wrong. It has to adopt Chris' stance of moral relativism ACROSS ITS WHOLE. "Don't you see? Kreia is right because all the jedi you meet are total dicks who betray you even though they need to stop a greater evil >:D", and "Don't you see? JEDI as a CONCEPT are bad because its stupid space magic and nobody understands it >:D" which all feels *less* like something that's true to Starwars (especially the Kotor era), and more something directly from Chris' head. Kotor 1 establishes, constantly, that people are widely aware of the differences between Jedi and Sith, because they're able to distinctly identify the differences between the political bodies those "wizards" are associated with. Chris invents the term "jedi civil war" to describe the war between the Galatic Republic, and the Sith Empire, as a means of suggesting the populace at large can't distinguish between Jedi and Sith, while willfully ignoring that Revan (and Malak) were not waging war on THE JEDI, they were wagin war on THE REPUBLIC. Taris isn't a 'jedi' planet, Manaan isn't a 'jedi' planet. Taris is blockaded, and occupied, by Sith Imperial Troops, not ONE of them is so much as brandishing a lightsaber. The sith, during the war, who *were* jedi once, actively *DENOUNCE* the title. They make it *VERY* clear they are *SITH* and affiliate themselves with the empire of the same name. They are cartoonishly hammy about this. There is no way a random passerby could mistake the two, especially when the sith (dark jedi) share the name with the opposing force to the Republic, the Sith. It'd be like calling the American Revolution the British Civil War. You *can't* make that mistake, even as a layman. It's a distinction *MEETRA* knows, and she needed to be *TOLD* about the war! She leaves *BEFORE* the "jedi civil war" begins, she needs to be informed about it, and even she can say "that's stupid it wasnt the jedi fighting the jedi it was the jedi fighting the sith" and then you're condescended to by the game "Pfft. You think anybody cares? All people saw was the wizards fighting eachother." which, ya know, deliberately ignores the fact Ravan and Malak's invasion force has sacked entire worlds and is currently waging war on the Republic, jedi or no jedi. It's also a wierd distinction, because Jolee Bindo served in a war before Kotor 1. That was *was* the jedi civil war, where the jedi ideology schismed to form the Sith ideology, which was called *THE GREAT SITH WAR* This war should have just been called the Second Great Sith War, but that name hurts the narrative the game wants to push. The game wants to push the idea that the Jedi are evil, just like the sith, but in different ways, while ignoring the sith's ideology is quite literally based on Nazi literature 9as per Bioware, the ones who penned the Sith ideology to begin with). It's just... so transparent with its contempt of Starwars, the Jedi, the Force. Kreia ends up being vindicated by the story not because she's actually right, but because the writer writes everyone in such a way as to entirely support her, in the hopes you'll forget her plan is to kill the force, which would require using a weapon of catastrophic destruction that could potentially throw the struggling Republic into ruin, while being *ENTIRELY* aware that Revan is, as she's trying to kill the force, raising an army to fight some unknown threat and would *VERY LIKELY NEED THE FORCE TO DO THAT.* But no. Grey jedi. Grey force. Everyone is evil and stupid except me. </p>

<p> I don't really care for any Star Wars media anymore, never cared for it much anyway. The thing i care about are good stories. I get it, you can't do the story of a little kid from a farm world that discovers he has powers over and over, however you can do other stories. Here you have :1) a new government that is struggling to control the galaxy, with separatists and loyalists rising up everywhere. The potential for drama and interesting tales is immense 2) Two women, which we are told were master and apprentice at one time, that don't talk anymore because of something that happened in the past. Maybe they were even lovers, with all the ethical and moral dilemmas it entails. You could write a serious novel about that, about broken trust, a friendship that has to be mended(or not), loss and love, sexual tension and self realization, going beyond what was probably a toxic relationship.3) Sabine was not force sensitive, which makes her incredibly intetesting as an heroine. She knows of the force and knows many of the techniques, she could develop original ways to counter what is essentialy magic and plot armour with her ingenuity, making her a symphatetic character. She was stabbed, make her have cyber implants, the struggle of dealing with that, learning to surpass her limitations. This is the "future" after all, stop with the new age bs and let's go Ghost in the Shell with this. 4) Thrawn is a looming threat, which makes no sense because even the navy of a small island has more than one general or high ranking officer. Granted he was supposedly an evil genius and a mastermind, but a VAST military apparatus like the Empire would have at least dozens of similarly competent officers, maybe not as good, but still very capable. But ok, let's say Thrawn is the BBE. Make the other villains and the Republic competent. Look, in every modern government there is an almost infinite amount of bureacracy and possible mistakes, overlooks etc... The core of the bureacratic apparatus is made by competent professionals that just do their job and make the government work. They are always the same people no matter the government, there must have been thousands of civil servants alive during the old republic, the empire and the new republic as well. You don't go and change all the pencil pushers when you overthrow a government. Look at the Roman Empire for example, there were times the Emperor changed in a matter of years, do you think the random guy in charge of manteining the acqueducts in what is now Marseille changed too? Of course not. He just swear fealty to the new emperor and went on with his job. Why i am saying this? The fact the higher ups of the New Republic are self centered morons, doesn't mean that Bebo Trazer the head of security at Dock 15 is an incompetent too.He's been doing the same job for 20 years, he knows the protocols and all the tricks, he doesn't stand for anyone's bs. Both the Imperials and the NewRepublicans should be competent, with only the rare corrupt higher up being an obtuse moron because he came to his post recently because of nepotism. Otherwise the world doesn't work, the stakes are incredibly low and the heroes are bullying the special kids. </p>

<p> 44:12 I think this refers to the experiences made in post WW2 Germany. In the new republic of Germany starting 1948, many ex-Nazis of all levels continued to serve in all kind of public services. High officials, judges, police officers, prosecutors, politicians and even ministers and later federal chancellors. And of course, non of them ever did or participated in anything bad. 😇 The first Chancellor Konrad Adenauer once said the following in response to the question of whether so many former Nazi personnel should be tolerated in the administration: "You can't throw out the old bathwater before you have new bathwater". That is exactly what is depicted in this scene. Not all members of the NSDAP were convinced nazis, it was just very useful for one's career (or survival) to be a party member. I would have expected the new trilogy to pick up on this. A shattered Empire, uncertainty on whom to pledge your allegiance to, a not yet ready new government, Luke struggling on how and even if he should restore a Jedi Order…..There would‘ve been tons of interesting point to start from….I was so naive…😢 </p>

<p> Y'know, the whole 'Sabine gets stabbed' thing could have been really good if things in Stars War were allowed to have consequences. Like I don't doubt that she could have survived that hit with SW Medical Tech. She was stabbed to the side so her Spine is fine, she probably has a heavily damaged and collapsed lung and her intestines might now be perforated, but that's all reparable and not immediately fatal. But it should have had consequences, even Consequences that don't directly impede her abilities. For Comparison, When Luke lost his Hand at the end of Empire there were major consequences for his character even if he got an effectively perfect replacement, right down to still having a sense of touch just like 2 scenes later. The Consequence for this loss was that it put serious doubts into our head about whether Luke would stay on the Light Side. At the point where it happens we've had Luke's experience in the Cave on Dagobah just recently, where it showed a vision of a dark future where Luke wears the Vader Armor. We've had Luke disobey both of his teachers and abandon his Jedi Training, potentially permanently. He's failed to save his Best Friend, got his Ass Kicked by Vader, and then been crushed by the knowledge that Vader is his Father. There's a serious risk of Luke following in Vader's Footsteps. He's just become slightly Less Man and More Machine, just like Daddy. And this continues in Return where the first time we see Luke he's dressed all in Black, he's Force Choking Gamorreans, he's got a Cloak and Hood over his face, and I do think part of the out-of-universe reason he hides his Saber as long as he does is so George could push the reveal of his new saber back and give us time to wonder just what color it might be. There's serious doubts, and he continues to wrestle with the Dark Side for the rest of the movie until his final triumph. There's actually a beautiful opportunity to add this sort of doubt to not just Sabine, but also to Ahsoka here, because if we go with the 'It Punctured her Lung' it wouldn't be unreasonable for her to wake up with a shiny new Synthetic Lung. Because what's one of the most iconic aspects of Darth Vader? His Breathing. Imagine that every time Sabine is on scene, maybe subtly, quietly, unless the entire scene is quiet, we can just barely hear the faintest echo of Vader's Breathing. Its a constant reminder to Sabine of her stupidity and failure, and it's a worrying precedent for Ahsoka, who now has to wonder if she's already failed Sabine so badly that Sabine is going down Vader's Path. </p>

<p> From the beginning, the sheer scale of "Andor" has not been lost on its cast, writers, crew, or viewers. This is a planet-hopping, plot-packed, character-laden whirlwind of a story, but as with the first season, it's the little things that get you first. Never before has the lived-in aesthetic that so helped early "Star Wars" stories attain verisimilitude achieved so much in such a far-reaching way. "Andor" will tell you how these characters eat, cook, and even commute to work — and it will do it all while keeping the plot moving and delicately shading in the lives of its huge ensemble cast. It's a deeply, fascinatingly immersive show, and every episode there's something — like Syril's bowl of what looked like cereal in the first season — that keeps you looking deeper. When we talk about things that "feel" like they're "Star Wars," that's a big part of it, and "Andor" exudes it through its entire production design. </p>

<p> Throughout its original run, "Andor" was praised for its complexity and maturity, its ability to project a grown-up feeling in "Star Wars" without ever resorting to grimdark cliches. All of that is still here and arguably even better in the second season, but what makes these 12 episodes truly shine isn't just the plotting, or the dialogue, or the careful way the show balances "Star Wars" action with an honest attempt to do something new in this world. No, what makes "Andor" Season 2 so very special is the emotional payoff it brings to bear on all that hype. This is, just as it was before, a show about tired, desperate, frightened people just trying to hold on to something worth saving, and while the cloak-and-dagger thrills of the show never leave us, it's that feeling that persists the longest, keeps us hanging onto every scene. This show, steeped in authoritarian tactics and darkness, could not have returned at a better time, and yet "Andor" does not preach to us, does not talk down, does not resort to easy black-and-white morality. It's earnest, honest almost to a fault, and determined to remain true to these fighters, these people who refuse to quit, who can tell us something powerful about the world we're in now. For those reasons, and many others, it's the best "Star Wars" series by far, a triumph for Lucasfilm, and a masterwork within one of genre's most venerated franchises. </p>

<p> Because, god, what a relief it is to fall back into this show’s rhythms, its performances, its endless fascination with the tiny tactile details of the Star Wars universe. (There’s a moment late in the episode, at a top-secret meeting of Imperial muckymucks plotting to suppress a planet they intend to “gouge mine” down to the atoms, when director Ariel Kleiman focuses the camera on the fussy little snack table some poor lackey has laid out for these bloodless psychopaths to nosh on. The “banality of evil” is a familiar phrase these days, but that doesn’t mean there isn’t something mesmerizing about seeing it get expressed so pointedly through finger foods.) In the show’s first season, creator Tony Gilroy and his team made Star Wars feel real again, in part, by focusing on the sometimes literal nuts and bolts that hold this world together. That attention to the ways things work—spaceships, propaganda meetings, and even just the wars we wage within ourselves—is still in full evidence here. The tension and pressure that Gilroy and Kleiman build in this initial outing, as we cut between Cass falling into the hands of some unaffiliated Rebels with murderous intent, Mon Mothma navigating the less overtly deadly currents of her daughter’s wedding on Chandrilla, and Imperial agent Dedra Meero catching the eye of Ben Mendelsohn’s Director Krennic, works because we have so much real for it all to push against. </p>

<p> That most especially now includes Cassian Andor himself. Andor‘s first season sometimes struggled with the fact that its title character was often its least interesting, and interested, mover-and-shaker: Despite Diego Luna’s expressive and charismatic performance, it could be hard to zero in on a guy whose eye was permanently fixed on nothing more than the next escape route. A year later, we re-meet a Cass who’s surer in himself and his convictions—if still more comfortable working as a conman/scoundrel than a more traditional action hero. Luna’s still just as deft at tossing out Cassian’s faux-casual patter, whether he’s building up a nervous double agent (“You’re coming home to yourself”) or probing his captors for weak points. But he’s even better in the quiet seconds, whether that means flop-sweating his way forward, after his slick spy escape turns out to be more Austin Powers than James Bond, or running the math on where the psychological shortcomings in the “organization” that’s taken him captive are. </p>

<p> But one of the appeals of Andor has also always been that it’s more of an ensemble series than its title might let on, and it’s just as refreshing to be back in the orbit of Genevieve O’Reilly’s Mon Mothma and Denise Gough’s Meero as both navigate environments suffused with tensions both spoken and not. The Chandrilla sections of tonight’s premiere are probably its most overt, and least instantly necessary, bits of table setting—give or take the short check-ins we get with Joplin Sibtain’s Brasso and Adria Arjona’s nightmare-haunted Bix on a pastoral Imperial world—but watching O’Reilly flick between five different flavors of smile to match the needs of the moment has a trove of small delights. (That’s particularly true once she gets the not-especially-welcome news that flamboyant antiquities dealer/coldly lethal Rebel spymaster Luthen Rael will be attending her daughter’s nuptials. Stellan Skarsgård doesn’t get to do any wild scenery chewing tonight, but the mere presence of his voice cutting through the crowd, moments before Luthen swans into view, can’t help but turn the temperature up.) </p>

<p> Gough, meanwhile, continues to give what may be the single most interesting performance in a show that makes that competition an extremely crowded one. The sequences with her carefully watching Mendelsohn’s Krennic in his secret conference room in the Maltheen Divide are the most overtly satirical Andor lets itself get in this premiere, especially when the Rogue One villain invites the smooth-talking goons from “The Ministry Of Enlightenment” to talk about how they can “weaponize Galactic opinion” against the spider-loving people of Ghorman so that the Empire can frack their planet to death. These sequences, of Imperial functionaries sparring with each other over territory and logistics, are some of my favorite parts of Andor and feel of a piece with the show’s larger obsession with process and the tiny steps that make up massive acts of both great heroism and unimaginable evil. Andor is a show where the most dangerous moves happen in the head, not the hands, and watching Meero balance the bureaucrat’s automatic caution against her own ambition, and her almost instinctive understanding of the levers inside other people’s heads, is just as thrilling as any of the moments of gunfire that punctuate the hour. “You need a radical insurgency you can count on,” she offers up to a purring, almost foppish Krennic, tossing out one of those so-casually-clever lines that Gilroy fills his scripts with. As in the show’s first season, Gough balances the undeniable appeal of quiet competence against the loathsomeness of the ends it’s being deployed in service of. Krennic is not the only one intrigued by where Dedra’s headed next. </p>

<p> If this premiere has a flaw, then, it’s simply a mild one of pacing: We start with a brief burst of action before slamming on the breaks for the next thirty minutes, as the show does the necessary work of re-introducing us to its characters and their individual, disconnected settings. (It doesn’t help that, after that intro, the only genuinely new folks who get any focus are the rebels/bandits Cassian ends up captured by, who are pretty clearly meant to be little more than fodder.) Luna has talked in interviews about how each of this season’s three-episode blocks is arranged a bit like a movie, covering a single year of Cassian’s life. It’ll be interesting to see how each of these individual instances of rising action will fare when taken as singular episodes of TV, because it’s easy to imagine them getting bogged down in repeated instances of setup. For now, though, I can’t be bothered by any of this enough to care: Being back in a version of Star Wars where people act like this, talk like this, think like this, is simply too exciting to get slowed down with splitting hairs. The party’s kicking off, and the bolts are flying: I’m simply humming with excitement to see where Andor takes us next. </p>

<p> Building a rebellion is easier said than done, and “Andor” uses its final season to portray a mix of contrasting nuances and moral stances, showcasing different approaches to resisting the Empire and the problems that come with each of them. From attempts at playing nice in politics while your opponent is waving a cannon at your face and orchestrating atrocities behind your back, to playing dirty and ignoring the human cost of fighting back, to the naïveté and excitement of new formed insurgency, the season is as timely as it is timeless. “Andor” already gave us a first season that showed a different, more mundane evil in its portrayal of the imperial prison system, but Season 2 takes it to another level. From a storyline about an authoritarian regime cracking down on immigration after they themselves encouraged undocumented immigration to be exploited for work, to a seemingly ordinary boardroom meeting with cakes and coffee that’s also about unleashing unspeakable atrocities in a scene straight out of “The Zone of Interest,” this season feels explicitly of this moment in history. </p>

<p> Of course, when Andor’s second season picks up, a year after the end of the first, most of the pivotal players are still alive and kicking: Cassian, his lover Bix (Adria Arjona), the senator and future revolutionary leader Mon Mothma (Genevieve O’Reilly), and the rebel spy and antiquities dealer Luthen Rael (Stellan Skarsgård), not to mention their nemeses, the Imperial security officer Dedra Meero (Denise Gough) and the ambitious civil servant Syril Karn (Kyle Soller). But we already know how and when Cassian Andor will die, and every time the opening caption tells us the story has jumped forward another year, we’re that much closer to the end. (The 12-episode season, which premieres at 9 p.m. Eastern on Tuesday, is split into, and will air as, four three-episode chunks, each covering a year before the Death Star–destroying Battle of Yavin: BBY 4, BBY 3, and so on.) As for the rest, well, perhaps some will make it out unscathed. (Critics were sent the entire season in advance, but not even the Bor Gullet could compel me to reveal what happens.) Still, it stands to reason that if characters as important as this to the rebellion—either as participants or opponents—were kicking around when the main Star Wars story gets under way, someone in those films would have at least mentioned them in passing. In that sense, the final tally is no surprise: As Luthen puts it, when it comes to the Empire, “We’ll put them down or die trying. What else is there?” </p>

<p> Although Andor’s first season was released on a weekly schedule, it wasn’t built like one—early episodes especially seemed to end almost arbitrarily, trusting in the power of the franchise to keep viewers coming back. Its second and final season begins in similarly leisurely fashion, with a story that moves so slowly the show’s protagonist spends most of an episode tied up and immobilized, and an entire BBY is devoted to the elaborate festivities and political scheming around the wedding of Mon Mothma’s daughter. But Gilroy and the show’s other writers, who include House of Cards creator Beau Willimon, The Disaster Artist author Tom Bissell, and Nightcrawler writer-director Dan Gilroy (Tony’s brother; a third, John Gilroy, edits the series), are working at a scope that genuinely deserves to be called novelistic, delving into the quotidian aspects of life under imperial rule that other entries in the series rarely take time to explore. It’s the story of how an entire galactic society, and not just one apolitical scrounger, is moved to the point of armed insurrection, the minor slights and major injustices that push a people to the brink. George Lucas has often said that the first Star Wars was inspired by the Viet Cong, but Andor actually follows through on that idea. (There’s also a chapter that seems to be, rather pointedly, modeled after the Dutch resistance to Nazi occupation.) Its rebellion is messy and brutal, sometimes morally murky, withholding the reassurance that doing what is necessary and what is right always dovetail neatly. There are cold-blooded killings and terrorist attacks, explained but not rationalized, as well as an accumulating sense of what building a guerrilla movement costs, and not just in terms of lives. When it comes to depicting the complexities of a populist uprising, Andor is to Star Wars as The Battle of Algiers is to a dorm-room poster of Che Guevara. </p>

<p> It’s also, to be fair, a lot less fun than Lucas’ original trilogy. Gilroy largely sidelines the fantastic elements of the Star Wars universe, the cuddly aliens and monkish mysticism, although he still makes room for the occasional wisecracking droid. This is a world in which the characters bleed visible blood rather than simply falling over when they’re struck by a shaft of light. Heroes die ignoble deaths, and villains escape their just punishment. The rich texture of the show’s sprawling social portraiture sometimes undercuts Star Wars’ origins in the thrill of pulp storytelling; Luthen’s elaborate schemes have more to do with John le Carré than they do Flash Gordon. And while it packs a cumulative wallop, the second season lacks a single storyline as galvanizing as the first’s mass prison breakout. (There’s also nothing to compare with the previous season’s “Freedom is a pure idea” manifesto, although there are several attempts to create a rhetorical spiel of similar impact.) </p>

<p> Andor also has a less high-minded job to do, which is to set the stage for one of the lesser entries in the Star Wars franchise. As the show’s story draws closer to Rogue One’s, the Easter eggs start to proliferate, which is inevitable but still something of a letdown. Unless you’ve seen the movie more recently than nine years ago, you may be confused why the camera seems to linger on certain not-quite-familiar faces. It’s a little like being at a high school reunion and trying to place a classmate you never really talked to. (There’s also one bit of prominent recasting, although it goes over smoothly.) But even though it’s a prequel to a prequel, Andor still finds a way to give its story a sense of weight and finality, closing its own chapter before “Watch Next” pops up in the corner of the screen. For the first time in the franchise’s nearly 50 years, you emerge with a sense of not just what the rebels were fighting for, but who—the ordinary citizens who bent under the empire’s yoke and were inspired to cast it off. For all its death-haunted foreboding, it’s also a show about how people lived, and how the onset of tyranny can poison even the most mundane aspects of domestic life. Gilroy is still telling a fable, but it’s one infused with so much intricacy and thoughtfulness that it feels almost uncannily real, a world you could step right into. Never has a galaxy so far away felt so close. </p>

<p> One year later, Luke helped rescue Han Solo from the vile Jabba the Hutt, before returning to Yoda to complete his training. On his deathbed, Yoda confirmed that Vader was Luke’s father and that his training was complete, with Obi-Wan explaining the whole truth and revealing that Leia was Luke’s long-lost sister. Knowing he had to face Vader again, Luke returned to his friends, confiding in Leia the truth of their heritage as he prepared to surrender to the Empire, imploring his father to let go of his hate. Brought before Emperor Palpatine, Luke was unable to ignore his emotional connections to his friends, and so he duelled and defeated his father. Seeing that he would end up just Vader, Luke refused to turn to the dark side, enduring the torture of Palpatine, begging for his father to help him. His pleas and pain finally breaking through to his father, Vader intervened, sacrificing his life to defeat the Emperor and finally redeeming Anakin Skywalker with his selfless act. Before his death, Anakin looked at his son with his own eyes for the first and final time, proud that Luke was right about him. </p>

<p> With help from his friends, Luke eventually turned back to the light and defeated the Emperor, where he used all of his knowledge and understanding to establish the New Jedi Order. He even married Mara Jade and had a son named Ben. Though his new life and the galactic peace that had been established was all threatened when Yuuzhan Vong War broke out, which transitioned the New Republic into the Galactic Alliance. Leading the fight against them, Luke was eventually able to defeat the invaders and restore peace, but a second Galactic Civil War disrupted it, and the Sith managed to return through Jacen Solo, Luke’s nephew, who ended up killing Luke’s wife, Mara Jade. Seeking vengeance for his wife’s murder, Luke slew the Sith Lumiya, thinking her responsible, but she wasn’t truly at fault. Recognising that if he sought out Jacen in revenge, he would fall down a path he would not be able to recover from, Luke instead taught his niece, Jaina Solo, to be the vanguard of the Jedi. She was eventually able to slay her brother and end the war, but at a high cost. </p>

<p> Ten years later, Shirou would be dragged into the Fifth Holy Grail War, accidentally calling out for a Servant to summon, and with Avalon inside of him, Artoria once more answered the call, returning to Fuyuki, this time under a much kinder Master. From here, their story would diverge greatly. One timeline has the two grow their relationship into a romantic one, with them working to take down Gilgamesh and Kirei Kotomine, and Artoria regaining Avalon as she comes to terms with the inevitable fall of her country. Another timeline (the best one) has Artoria become both a mentor and mother figure for Shirou, as well as his girlfriend, Rin, even accepting her past and giving up on her wish to help them save the world from Gilgamesh’s plans as Shirou truly came to break down his ideals and accept himself as a person. The final timeline would see Artoria corrupted by the Grail Mud and turned into a dark version of herself which fought against Shirou, though was defeated by the hero-to-be. </p>

<p> Artoria did not appear herself in any of these games, but is mentioned by Gawain himself. Gawain is stated to be Artoria’s equal in terms of combat when it is midday, Excalibur Galatine is the sister sword to Excalibur, and is considered to be the most powerful servant in the Extra series. Given that he able to fend off Passionlip and Meltryllis (who are combined with multiple divine beings though they was weakened in Foxtail, but Gawain should be stronger than the main character’s servant at the time), he even no sold an combined Noble Phantasm called Virgin (NSFW warning) Laser Palladion thanks to Numerial of the Saint, fought Karna when he was not powered by his sun until his he used his Noble Phantasm and beaten him, fend off Suzuka Gozen who fought Tamamo-no-Mae, fought against “BB” with Violet in Foxtail, and BB stated that if Gawain and Karna teamed up, even she would of been panicking. Due to Artoria being a Top Servant and comparable to Sefar in the next game we will mentioned, she should scale to every feat imaginable: </p>

<p> Fate/EX Timelines: This is the set of timelines where Fate/EXTRA, EXTRA CCC, EXTRA CCC FOXTAIL, Last Encore, EXTELLA and EXTELLA LINK happen. It used to be the same timeline as Fate/stay night up until 1973 where a certain event caused all mana in the world to dry up. By 2030, where the games take place, all mana is gone. The following isn’t stated in the official charts, but the EXTELLA games are sequels to the EXTRA games in the same sense that Fate/Zero is a prequel to Fate/stay night: both happen in parallel worlds where the events that transpired in the past are a bit different. The rewrite of these events is called Fate/EXTELLA ZERO, a blog made by Kinoko Nasu detailing these differences. See here for the blog (TL:DR of the blog is here). Curiously, characters from Fate/stay night and earlier non-Fate works like Tsukihime and Garden of Sinners appear as guest characters with half of their in-lore explanations being that they dreamed their way here (i.e. Rin, EMIYA and Ryougi Shiki) or were summoned here (i.e. Arcueid). </p>

<p> Now, that segues us into another important question… What can Luke do against Artoria? Plenty! Outside of simply overpowering her with his own attacks, or her attacks, Luke can employ Force Sever to end the fight rather quickly. Under reality-equalization, Luke would be able to directly sever Saber’s connection to a plethora of structures within the Nasuverse: the World, her Origin, Avalon, the Root, and even her Summoner. Fold Space would also be extremely useful in this battle. Artoria may have resisted Medea’s Enforced Transference, and can fight within spatial distortions, but Excalibur & Caliburn would still be vulnerable to it. Luke could simply “envision” all her weapons being displaced into another corner of the star system in an instant. Artoria has been shown “materializing” Excalibur in the past, but we have no basis to assume she’d be able to so if it’s directly BFR’d nor would she have the necessary range. In fact, during the UBW route, she was alongside Shirou for 2 weeks straight, being unable to call it back until Shirou specifically gave it to her. Avalon might not be susceptible to this though, as it is fused within Artoria’s body. Here’s the catch nonetheless, Saber would still lose access to all of her offensive options and have to rely solely on the “absolute defense” of Avalon. </p>

<p> One could argue that Artoria might attempt to go into CQC with Luke, but here’s where the next point comes into play. While Servants can withstand the gravitational forces of a black hole, this pales in comparison to the sheer range and telekinetic prowess granted to Luke by the Force. It has dwarfed the potency of black holes countless times within the EU, with Servants having no resistances at all to Telekinesis, let alone one of Luke’s level. Artoria was already at a disadvantage against Mind-Walking, but Force Kinesis allows Luke to ragdoll her while shutting down all her options for attack; controlling the entire battlefield. He could use this to crush her under the weight of the Force (with Artoria lacking in Lifting Strength feats to match), simply stop her from moving entirely, or throw her into space. Now, assuming she does get in close, Artoria will still have to battle someone who will always be a step ahead of her (Precognition + Mind-Walking), is far better in H2H, and takes the strength advantage. </p>

<p> Servants can resist Kama’s Authority, which is strong enough to envelop the entire universe and can provide infinite depravity for everyone in it. Incredibly impressive, but Luke’s usage of Affect Mind is nothing to scoff at either. Luke is capable of taking command of the entire Galaxy, and all the quadrillions of minds within it [as detailed in the Cosmology section: Galaxies in Star Wars are entirely separate dimensions]. With their use of the Unifying Force allowing them to induce those targets with visions of infinity. At face-value, it would seem that Luke & Karma’s mind-manipulation is comparable, but that couldn’t be further from the truth. A Force Nexus, one overpowered by Obi-Wan, could extend it’s reach to the 5-D plane of Hyperspace; turning it into unreality, while attacking Obi-Wan’s mind with the equivalent of an “army” of Sith simultaneously. Important to note, as two to three Force-sensitives working together at once can already breach mental barries and nearly destroy minds. </p>

<p> As the last note, we have the Golden Flash – an erasure to the point where your name, individuality, past, memories, and more are all erased, existing everywhere and nowhere at the same time, one with the totality of the Force. It erases your individuality and reduces your essence into the Force itself. Erasure on the level of the「 」. With Servants needing to stay awake to resist the much lower erasure of the Imaginary Number Space, something which is eclipsed by the very existence of the「 」. An argument could be made for Avalon shielding Saber from it, but it is extremely unlikely, as it is erasure on the level of one’s own Force essence by Oneness. As detailed in the statistics section too, Avalon could not shield Saber from Luke attacks in the first place due to the Force’s range & existence. Golden Flash is incredibly powerful, but it does have a downside, Luke nearly erased himself too without Han’s aid and would have died. Though, it is possible he could maintain his existence even past that point via manipulating his Force essence’s Pneuma. Death Battle might also consider this a Luke victory even if he perishes, as it’s been the case before. </p>

<p> However, both can push their arguments for power even higher – Luke was able to stand toe to toe with Abeloth’s avatar – while he was weaker than her, he was able to put up a good fight, and even defeat her with Oneness. Scaling to the Daughter and Abeloth’s own feats should put Luke within the Multi-Solar System, with him downscaling this in base form. However, Artoria can go even higher – due to being far greater in durability to Billy the Kid, who was able to tank Space Ishtar’s Noble Phantasm, which is at the bare minimum Galaxy level in potency, with the defeat of the Lostbelt Trees being within this range as well. But, we can go even further. Fate has several Universal feats – ranging from the Noble Phantasm for Space Ishtar being far more likely to be Universal in potency due to it being described as a universe, to Mysterious Heroine XX and X both having Universal feats of their own, as well as Kama and Caren being on this level – it’s fairly simple to put her at the Universal range. </p>

<p> For starters, Artoria’s many resistances give her counters to many of Luke’s more esoteric abilities – she resists matter manipulation, making Matter Control moot. In addition to that, she should be able to resist Force Push and Repulse due to her strength and durability advantage, as well as her high Magic Resistance, meaning that it’s unlikely they would be able to move her. Force Barrier shouldn’t be effective against Artoria’s strength advantage. Both Artoria and Luke have enhanced senses, with neither having a real advantage within that department. While being able to heal himself is useful, Artoria has better regeneration then Luke’s Force Healing should be able to match. In addition, while Electric Judgement is powerful, Artoria has shown to be able to resist electricity in the past, meaning that it should likely be ineffective. While Sever Force may be a neat trick, unfortunately, Artoria shouldn’t have a connection to the Force to begin with and their magic systems are too different to where it shouldn’t realistically be able to cut off Artoria’s magic. Rebuke only should work against Force Powers, with Artoria not having any Force Powers to begin with, making it irrelevant, and Force Immersion should be countered by Spirit Form for Artoria, making her likely able to sense Luke. </p>

<p> Kama’s mind hax was able to affect these same Servants that are already unaffected by Unified Language like Mata Hari a bit, even if they resist. Which implies Kama’s mind hax is not just infinite universal in potency, but also layered. Artoria has also stated in Fate/Grand Order that she cannot be corrupted into her Alter self anymore, which also may mean that she’s now unaffected by the Grail’s mud. Finally, if all else fails, she has the Red Dragon that protects her mind from attacks, and the Red Dragon can downscale from Tiamat since the Red Dragon is half of Albion, and Albion is a primordial dragon likely on the level of Tiamat. Tiamat herself was able to eventually break free of Merlin’s mind hax all the way from Avalon. And lastly, she can also resist Command Spells, which not every Servant can do. As a result of this, Artoria’s resistances should far exceed even the White Current in terms of potency in mind manipulation, making it unlikely that Luke should affect Artoria with said hax. </p>

<p> Fett has few lines in the movies. The prequels explain that he’s the son of another Mandalorian bounty hunter named Jango Fett, who provided the genetic material to create the clone troopers of the Clone Wars. Whatever. Point is, Boba Fett is the focus of some serious GenX nostalgia-energy, and that’s down to the effects of the justifiably reviled Star Wars Holiday Special, which aired around Christmas of 1978 on CBS. Written by a crew of TV comedy and variety show writers, it reassembled the entire cast as well as comedy bigwigs of the era to gin something up about Wookiee Christmas. None of the actors look particularly happy, or even sober. But a cartoon that ran as interstitials during the broadcast introduced Boba Fett in advance of his appearance in Empire Strikes Back, still two years away. And then Kenner announced a special giveaway of a Boba Fett action figure that was supposed to have a backpack that launched a “missile,” a spring-loaded plastic dart. Kenner scotched the potentially eye-putting-out missile before it went on sale, but if you have one of the prototypes, it’s worth $150,000 today. </p>

<p> CT-9904, or "Crosshair", is a defective clone trooper and member of Clone Force 99. He is the team's sniper, possessing genetic mutations that give him exceptional eyesight. He is the only member of Clone Force 99 whose biochip is activated when Order 66 is issued, causing him to turn on his squadmates after they rebel against the newly formed Galactic Empire. Crosshair is later put in charge of a unit of conscripted Imperial soldiers, and tasked with hunting down the Bad Batch. Though he eventually learns about his biochip and removes it, he continues to willingly serve the Empire, believing that attempting to fight it is useless and holding a grudge against the Bad Batch for abandoning him. After being forced to work with the Bad Batch to survive Tipoca City's destruction, Crosshair partially makes amends with his former squadmates, but still refuses to join them. He is later captured by Royce Hemlock and imprisoned at Dr Hemlock's base on Mount Tantiss, escaping with Omega and a lurca hound named Batcher. He joins the group on Pabu and at Hunter's request, gets his hand checked out by AZI-3. He is losing his accuracy and has a tremor in his hand from his months on Mount Tantiss. </p>

<p> CC-5576-39, or "Gregor", is a clone Commando thought to have died in the Battle of Sarrish. Stricken with amnesia and living on Abafar, he is later told by Colonel Meebur Gascon that he is a clone trooper, and seemingly sacrifices himself to help the Colonel and his droids to get off Abafar to save many Republic lives. However, he survives this ordeal and eventually returns to the Republic, after which he removes his biochip, so that he would not be forced to carry out Order 66. When the Republic is reorganized into the Empire after the end of the Clone Wars, Gregor is forced to train conscripted Imperial soldiers, until the Bad Batch rescue him. Years later, Gregor ends up in the Seelos system with fellow retired clones Rex and Wolffe, and is shown to have developed some eccentric tendencies. He aids a group of rebels against Imperial forces in a skirmish on the planet, and later takes part in a battle to free the planet Lothal from Imperial occupation, though he is fatally wounded by an Imperial technician during the battle. </p>

<p> Savage Opress is a Dathomirian Zabrak Nightbrother, and the brother of Darth Maul. He is hand picked by Asajj Ventress as part of her scheme to kill Count Dooku for the attempt on her life and is altered by the Nightsisters, becoming more of a berserker on Ventress' call to the point of killing Feral, (his adoptive brother), without remorse, Opress manages to become Dooku's new apprentice and learns only a bit in the ways of the Sith before Ventress has him help her fight Dooku, due to his actions under him getting unwanted attention from the Jedi. However, in the heat of the moment and provoked by both of them, Opress tries to kill both Dooku and Ventress before escaping the Jedi and instructed by Mother Talzin to find Maul so he can complete his training to defend himself against the numerous enemies he has made. Finding Maul a shell of his former self on a junk planet, Opress manages to stir up his fellow nightbrother's grudge with Obi-Wan to aid him in his revenge against the Jedi. He is later killed in a duel by Darth Sidious on Mandalore. </p>

<p> Tiber Saxon is Gar Saxon's brother, appointed Imperial Governor of Mandalore and leader of the Super Commandos after his brother was killed by Clan Wren. To put down the Mandalorian rebellion, he ordered the construction of a weapon known as an Arc Pulse Generator, code-named the "Duchess" (after the late Duchess Satine Kryze), developed by Sabine Wren when she was a cadet at the Imperial Academy on Mandalore. The weapon specifically targeted the alloy used in Mandalorian armor and superheated it, vaporizing the wearer. However, as Sabine had destroyed the plans and damaged the prototype when she defected, the weapon was not at its full potential; Grand Admiral Thrawn ordered the new Governor Saxon to capture Sabine to perfect the weapon. Imprisoned aboard Saxon's Imperial I-class Star Destroyer in the Mandalorian capital, Sabine altered the weapon to affect the alloys in Imperial armor, before breaching its core with the Darksaber and escaping. The explosion vaporized the Star Destroyer, killing Saxon and those of his men still on board. </p>

<p> Pre Vizsla is a Mandalorian warlord and the leader of the Death Watch during the Clone Wars. He wields the Darksaber, an ancient lightsaber forged by his ancestor, Tarre Vizsla. As the governor of Concordia, one of Mandalore's moons, Pre Vizsla initially forms a secret alliance with Count Dooku to take control of Mandalore by overthrowing its pacifist government led by Duchess Satine Kryze. Vizsla breaks ties with Dooku when their plan fails, and he later allies with Darth Maul and Savage Opress in recruiting the Black Sun, the Pyke Syndicate and the Hutt Clan to form a criminal organization known as the Shadow Collective. After ousting Duchess Satine, Vizsla betrays his allies and has them imprisoned, but Maul escapes and challenges Vizla to single combat. Vizsla accepts and is defeated by Maul, who executes him and takes over Mandalore and the Death Watch. </p>

<p> Ziro is a Galactic Basic-speaking Hutt crime lord, Jabba the Hutt's flamboyant uncle, and Mama the Hutt's son, who secretly plots to overthrow the Hutt Clan and usurp all their power. During the Clone Wars, he makes a secret plan with Count Dooku to have Jabba's son captured by Asajj Ventress and blame the Jedi for the incident, but their scheme fails, as Jabba's son is rescued by Anakin Skywalker and Ahsoka Tano, and Ziro is discovered and arrested by Padmé Amidala. While in prison, he hires Aurra Sing to assassinate Amidala, but she fails. Later, fearing that Ziro will give the Republic the Hutt Council's records that he had hidden away, Jabba hires Cad Bane and a team of bounty hunters to break him out of prison, with them taking several Senators hostage in exchange for Ziro's release. Ziro then meets with the rest of the Hutt Clan on Nal Hutta, but refuses to tell them where he had hidden the records and, thus, is imprisoned. He is broken out by his lover, Sy Snootles, shortly after, and the two of them head over to Mama the Hutt's house on Teth, where the records are located. However, Snootles betrays Ziro and reveals that she was hired by Jabba to find the records, before killing him. </p>

<p> The idea for the movie came from John Knoll, the chief creative officer of Industrial Light & Magic.[36] In May 2014, Lucasfilm announced Gareth Edwards as the director of an anthology film, with Gary Whitta writing the first draft for a release on December 16, 2016.[37] The film's title was revealed to be Rogue One, with Chris Weitz rewriting the script, and Felicity Jones in the starring role.[38] Ben Mendelsohn and Diego Luna also play new characters,[39] with James Earl Jones returning to voice Darth Vader.[40] Edwards stated, "It comes down to a group of individuals who don't have magical powers that have to somehow bring hope to the galaxy."[41] The film was the first to feature characters introduced in animated Star Wars TV series, namely The Clone Wars' Saw Gerrera, portrayed by Forest Whitaker in the film. The movie received generally positive reviews, with its performances, action sequences, soundtrack, visual effects and darker tone being praised. The film grossed over US$500 million worldwide within a week of its release.[42] </p>

<p> In 2019, then–Walt Disney Studios CCO Alan Horn stated that if The Mandalorian was successful, a feature film spin-off would be considered.[65] A fourth season of the TV series was written from May 2022[66] to February 2023.[67] Pre-production occurred in April 2023.[68] Filming for the season was scheduled to begin in September, but was delayed due to the 2023 Hollywood labor disputes.[69][70] In January 2024, it was announced that series creator Jon Favreau would write and direct a theatrical film based on the series (separate from Filoni's upcoming film), titled The Mandalorian and Grogu.[71][72] Filming was expected to begin later in 2024 as the first Star Wars film to enter production since The Rise of Skywalker.[50] In February 2024, Disney CEO Bob Iger announced that the film is aiming for a 2026 release, although specifics were not given at the time.[73] In April 2024, it was announced that the film would be released on May 22, 2026.[74] </p>

<p> In November 2022, Deadline Hollywood reported that Shawn Levy was in talks to direct a Star Wars film, following his work on Deadpool & Wolverine (2024) and the fifth and final season of Stranger Things.[58] In September 2023, Levy revealed that development had begun but had stalled due to the 2023 Writers Guild of America strike.[75] In July 2024, it was reported that Jonathan Tropper (who wrote Levy's The Adam Project) would write the film's screenplay.[76] In January 2025, Ryan Gosling entered talks to star in the film. It was also reported that Gosling's interest in the project accelerated it to become the next Star Wars film to enter production after The Mandalorian and Grogu.[77] In February 2025, Kathleen Kennedy acknowledged the film's existence and development status, confirming it would be released after The Mandalorian and Grogu. Kennedy also revealed that the film will take place "five to six years" after The Rise of Skywalker.[78] </p>

<p> In October 2022, The Hollywood Reporter reported that after a two-week writers' room in July (which included Patrick Somerville, Rayna McClendon, Andy Greenwald, and maybe Dave Filoni), Damon Lindelof and Justin Britt-Gibson were co-writing a Star Wars film, with Ms. Marvel director Sharmeen Obaid-Chinoy attached as director. THR reported that according to its sources, "the project is intended as a stand-alone but in success could lead to more movies", taking place after the sequel trilogy and possibly featuring some of its characters.[79][80][81] In March 2023, it was reported that Lindelof and Britt-Gibson had left the project in mid-February and that Steven Knight was hired to replace them as screenwriter. Filming was reportedly set to begin in February 2024.[82][83] At April 2023's Star Wars Celebration, Kennedy officially announced a Sharmeen Obaid-Chinoy-directed movie, with Daisy Ridley returning as Rey as she constructs a new Jedi Order 15 years after the events of The Rise of Skywalker.[52] She reportedly may be a supporting character in the vein of Jedi Masters Obi-Wan Kenobi and Luke Skywalker in the original and sequel trilogies, respectively.[84] Steven Knight departed the project by October 2024 with filming not expected to start until late 2025.[85] In January 2025, George Nolfi had been hired to write the screenplay.[86] </p>

<p> In April 2023, during Star Wars Celebration Europe IV, Lucasfilm announced that James Mangold would write and direct a Star Wars film whose story "will go back to the dawn of the Jedi" and explore the origins of The Force, set around 25,000 years before the events of A New Hope. It is set to be the start of a new era set within Star Wars timeline, dubbed Dawn of the Jedi.[89] The film has been described as a "Cecil B. DeMille-style biblical epic.", with Mangold citing The Ten Commandments as a major inspiration for the film.[90] Mangold was offered the project during production of Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny. Mangold confirmed shortly afterwards that he had begun developing the film alongside his screenplay for the DC Universe Swamp Thing film, and was uncertain which project would move forward first following his Bob Dylan biopic A Complete Unknown.[91] In April 2024, it was reported that Beau Willimon (who had written episodes of Andor) would co-write the film alongside Mangold.[92] During an interview in May 2024, producer Simon Emanuel seemingly revealed the film's title, Jedi Prime.[93] </p>

<p> On May 4, 2020, Taika Waititi (who directed the first-season finale of The Mandalorian and voiced IG-11) was officially announced to direct a Star Wars film from a screenplay he was co-writing with Krysty Wilson-Cairns.[51] As of May 2022, his film was expected to be released before Rogue Squadron[95] (originally scheduled for December 2023 prior to its delay),[54][96] with Kennedy asserting that Waititi's film may be released in late 2023.[97] In June 2022, Waititi agreed with Kennedy's view that the films should move into new territory in favor of origin stories,[98] and stated he would continue writing the project while filming other projects.[99] The movie was reportedly expected to be shot in Los Angeles.[100] By March 2023, Waititi was also likely to appear in the film.[101] The next month, Kennedy stated that Waititi was now writing the film alone.[102] In early May, Deadline Hollywood reported that Waititi may begin filming the project in 2024.[103] In September 2023, amidst rumors of the film's cancellation, it was revealed that it was still in development and that Waititi would resume writing the script after the conclusion of the 2023 Writers Guild of America strike.[104] In February 2025, Kathleen Kennedy revealed that Waititi was still working on the script with a new co-writer.[105] </p>

<p> On December 10, 2020, during Disney Investor Day, Wonder Woman (2017) director Patty Jenkins was announced as the director of a film titled Rogue Squadron, initially set to be released on December 22, 2023.[111][d] According to the official Star Wars website, the film would "introduce a new generation of starfighter pilots as they earn their wings and risk their lives in a boundary-pushing, high-speed thrill-ride, and move the saga into the future era of the galaxy."[112] According to Jenkins, the film would be an original story "with great influence from the games and the books".[113] A script was being worked on as of December 2020,[114] at which time, Wonder Woman 3's story was still being worked on.[115] Matthew Robinson was hired to write Rogue Squadron in May 2021;[116][117] late the next month, Jenkins revealed that the script was almost finished.[118] On November 8, the film's production was delayed from 2022 due to Jenkins' busy schedule.[119] A month later, Jenkins had left her planned Cleopatra film as director in order to focus on Rogue Squadron and Wonder Woman 3.[120] Disney announced in April 2022 that the film was still set to be released in December 2023.[121] Kathleen Kennedy stated in May that the film has been "pushed off to the side for the moment", with the script still being worked on and Waititi's film expected to be released first.[54] On September 15, 2022, the film was confirmed to be taken off from Disney's release schedule,[96] although in December Jenkins said she was actively working on it amid the apparent cancellation of Wonder Woman 3.[122] In April 2023, Kennedy said the project could still happen either as a film or a television series.[123] On March 13, 2024, Jenkins stated that she had signed a new contract with Lucasfilm to write and direct Rogue Squadron.[124] </p>

<p> The Ewoks from Return of the Jedi were featured in two spin-off television films, The Ewok Adventure and Ewoks: The Battle for Endor. Both aired on ABC on the Thanksgiving weekends of 1984 and 1985, respectively,[134] with at least the first also being given a limited international theatrical release.[20] Warwick Davis reprised his debut role as the main Ewok, Wicket, in both.[135][136] They are set between the events of The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.[137] Both films were released on VHS, LaserDisc, and on a double-feature DVD. Although based on stories written by George Lucas, they do not bear Star Wars in their titles, and were considered to exist in a lower level of canon than the episodic films. Following Disney's acquisition of the franchise, they were excluded from the canon.[138][20] The Battle for Endor would be the last live-action Star Wars television project produced by Lucasfilm until 2019's The Mandalorian. </p>

<p> In early 2013, Bob Iger announced the development of spin-off films focusing on Han Solo, Boba Fett, and Yoda. Simon Kinberg was announced to be the screenwriter of the Boba Fett film shortly afterward.[215] In mid-2014, Josh Trank was officially announced as the director of an undisclosed spin-off film,[216] but had left the project a year later due to creative differences,[217] causing a teaser for the film to be scrapped from Star Wars Celebration.[218] Though it was later revealed that Trank was removed from the project following behind the scenes issues on Fantastic Four. In May 2020, Trank confirmed that his planned Star Wars film was the Boba Fett film. In May 2018, it was reported that James Mangold would direct the Boba Fett movie, with Kinberg still attached as screenwriter. Five months later, the film was announced to be cancelled, with Lucasfilm instead focusing their attention on The Mandalorian, which utilized a similar character to Fett. Mangold confirmed his brief involvement in 2023, revealing he wrote a "borderline R-rated" script. He cited the poor commercial performance of Solo as the main reason for the film's cancellation.[219][220][221][222][223] </p>

<p> In 2018, Lucasfilm announced that Game of Thrones showrunners D. B. Weiss & David Benioff would develop a series of Star Wars films, often believed to be a trilogy.[235] In 2019, Kathleen Kennedy revealed the studio's intention of planning the next decade of films, with Weiss, Benioff, and Rian Johnson working together to map out the franchise's future.[236] A month later, Bob Iger announced that the first Star Wars film released after a brief hiatus following the release of The Rise of Skywalker would be directed by Weiss & Benioff, set to be released in 2022.[237] In October 2019, it was revealed that Weiss & Benioff had departed their trilogy after making an overall deal with Netflix. Though Kathleen Kennedy expressed interest in working with the duo in the future.[238] Weiss & Benioff's films would have focused on the origins of the Jedi.[239] </p>

<p> In September 2019, Marvel Cinematic Universe producer Kevin Feige reportedly began developing a Star Wars film with Kennedy;[242] Michael Waldron was later announced to write the screenplay.[243][g][h] In May 2022, Waldron confirmed the project was moving forward and that it would more or less stand alone,[246] however in a separate interview the same month Kennedy denied that the film was in active development.[95] By March 2023, the film was confirmed to no longer be in development.[101] Contrary to earlier comments, Kennedy clarified the following month that the project was more something conflated through the media, that "nothing ever got developed. We never discussed an idea... If [Feige] did come up with something, I would be all ears. But, that's never really happened, so it's not an abandoned project. It just never really happened."[247] In May 2023, Anthony and Joe Russo (who collaborated with Feige on multiple films set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe) revealed that they had conversations with Feige about potentially directing the film.[248] </p>

<p> The Star Wars franchise has spawned multiple films and television series. Two animated series were released in the mid-1980s. Further animated series began to be released in the 2000s, the first two of which focused on the prequel trilogy-era Clone Wars. After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, only The Clone Wars was kept in the canon of continuity of the episodic Star Wars films. Two additional half-hour animated series were created: Rebels, which ties into the original trilogy, and Resistance, which ties into the sequel trilogy. An additional spin-off series from The Clone Wars, titled The Bad Batch, debuted on Disney+ in 2021. Two animated anthology series have been produced: Visions in 2021 and Star Wars: Tales, with Tales of the Jedi in 2022 and Tales of the Empire in 2024. The first young audience animated series, Young Jedi Adventures, set during the High Republic era, premiered in May 2023. </p>

<p> In August 2019, it was reported that a series focused on Obi-Wan Kenobi was in development, with Ewan McGregor in talks to reprise his role from the prequel trilogy. The series was initially thought to have been developing as a standalone film, which was ultimately scrapped due to the performance of Solo at the box office.[93] During the 2019 D23 Expo, Lucasfilm officially announced that the series was in development, with McGregor confirmed to reprise his role as the titular character.[94] It will take place ten years after Revenge of the Sith, thus exploring the time during Kenobi's exile prior to the events of A New Hope.[95] In September 2019, Deborah Chow and Hossein Amini were announced as the series' director and writer, respectively, who will also serve as executive producers alongside McGregor.[96] In April 2020, it was announced that Joby Harold would officially be taking over writing duties from Amini.[97] In August 2020, Kathleen Kennedy told TheWrap that it would be a limited series.[98] Filming had begun by May 2021.[99] </p>

<p> In November 2018, a prequel series to the 2016 film Rogue One centered on Andor was confirmed to be in development, described as a "rousing spy thriller" with Diego Luna reprising his role for the series.[102] Stephen Schiff was hired to serve as showrunner and executive producer of the series, which was developed by Jared Bush, who wrote a series bible and a draft of the pilot episode.[104] In April 2019, Alan Tudyk was confirmed to be reprising his role of K-2SO.[105] In April 2020, Tony Gilroy, who worked on the reshoots of Rogue One, replaced Schiff as showrunner. Gilroy was going to write and direct the pilot, and direct other episodes as well.[74] It was also revealed in April 2020 that Stellan Skarsgård, Kyle Soller, and Denise Gough had joined the cast in undisclosed roles, along with Genevieve O'Reilly reprising her role of Mon Mothma.[103][106] In September 2020, it was announced that Gilroy would step down from his directing duties in light of the COVID-19 pandemic and would be replaced by Toby Haynes, who was set to direct the first three episodes.[107] Filming began in late November 2020 in London.[108] Andor premiered on September 21, 2022,[109] and the first season consisted of 12 episodes.[110] A second and final season is in development,[75] and is expected to premiere on April 22, 2025.[111] </p>

<p> In April 2020, Variety reported that a female-centric live-action Star Wars series is in development for Disney+ with Russian Doll co-creator Leslye Headland serving as a writer and showrunner.[126] In early November, Headland expounded that the series would be set "in a pocket of the universe and a pocket of the timeline that we don't know much about," elaborating that she was more engaged creatively with the geography of the Star Wars universe than its existing visuals.[127] On November 5, Deadline reported that the series was expected to be an "action thriller with martial arts elements".[128] On Disney Investor Day 2020, it was revealed that the series would be titled The Acolyte and take place during the late High Republic era.[79] In mid-2021, it was reported that the series would consist of eight episodes.[129] In May 2022, Headland said the series would be a "mystery thriller" set about 100 years before The Phantom Menace, that writing was almost complete, and that the series was casting;[80] In 2022, Amandla Stenberg, Lee Jung-jae, and Manny Jacinto were confirmed to be playing major roles.[130][131][132] The eight-episode series premiered on Disney+ on June 4, 2024.[133] </p>

<p> In February 2022, Production Weekly revealed the existence of an upcoming, untitled Star Wars series that was using the working title Grammar Rodeo.[134] It was later reported that Jon Watts was being considered to direct at least one episode of the series, along with Favreau as an executive producer. Casting was set to include four teenage actors and one 30-to-40-year old actor as its series regulars. Filming was set to begin as early as June 2022 and last until December 2022 at Manhattan Beach Studios, with a formal announcement planned for the series at Star Wars Celebration in May 2022.[135][136] In mid-May 2022, it was further revealed that the series was being created and written by Christopher Ford, who would also executive produce with Watts. The series would be set after the events of Return of the Jedi (1983) and was being described as a "galactic version of classic Amblin coming-of-age adventure films of the '80s".[80] At Star Wars Celebration it was revealed that the series was titled Skeleton Crew and that it would star Jude Law.[137] Filming had been happening for a "few weeks" by early September 2022.[138] The series premiered on December 2, 2024.[139] </p>

<p> In 2005, plans for a live-action television series set between the prequel and original trilogies were announced at Star Wars Celebration.[220] In 2007, Lucas described the project as "one show that will split into four shows, focusing on different characters."[221] It entered development in early 2009.[222] The series was described as "gritty and dark" and was expected to feature characters such as Han Solo, Chewbacca, Lando Calrissian,[223] Boba Fett,[224] C-3PO, and Emperor Palpatine. Lucas described the series as "more talky. It's more of what I would call a soap opera with a bunch of personal dramas in it. It's not really based on action-adventure films from the '30s—it's actually more based on film noir movies from the '40s!"[225] Producer Rick McCallum revealed the working title, Star Wars: Underworld, in 2012,[226] and that it would focus on criminal and political power struggles in the "period when the Empire is trying to take things over."[227] </p>

<p> In December 2020, Rangers of the New Republic was announced. Developed by Favreau and Filoni,[112] it was planned to tie into The Mandalorian, The Book of Boba Fett, and Ahsoka.[112][113] Variety reported in May 2021 that the series was not in active development.[239] In an interview with Empire published in November 2021, Kathleen Kennedy said development had not reached a point where scripts were written and that she felt some of the ideas for the series would "figure into future episodes ... of the next iteration of Mandalorian".[240] Empire cited Gina Carano's departure from Lucasfilm as a possible reason for the halting of the series, implying that her character, Cara Dune, was intended to star in it.[241] A Mandalorian spin-off series centered on Dune had been rumored by late 2020,[242][243] but after Carano posted controversial social media statements in November 2020 and February 2021, Disney severed ties with the actress.[242] </p>

<p> In "Chapter 11: The Heiress", Bo-Katan and the Nite Owls rescue The Mandalorian and The Child. She introduces herself, revealing her heritage as a Mandalorian, and that Din Djarin's group are zealots who wish to restore ancient Mandalorian traditions. The Mandalorian leaves rejecting their help. Later Bo-Katan and the Nite Owls again rescue The Mandalorian. In return for information he reluctantly agrees to help them seize a shipment of weapons. During the raid Bo-Katan changes plan, deciding to take the whole ship, not just the weapons. When they capture the bridge, Bo-Katan interrogates the head officer, wanting to know about the Dark Saber. Bo-Katan was impressed by the Mandalorian and invites him to join them, but he must continue his quest, so she tells him to go to the forest planet of Corvus, to find the Jedi Ahsoka Tano. In "Chapter 16" Bo-Katan helps The Mandalorian to rescue The Child from Moff Gideon. </p>

<p> Dr. Penn Pershing is a doctor and scientist affiliated with the Imperial remnant who works with the Client in his attempts to capture the Child.[57] He has appeared in several episodes of The Mandalorian,[58] starting with the series premiere "Chapter 1: The Mandalorian", in which he is present on an Imperial compound on Nevarro when the Client hires the Mandalorian to track down and deliver the Child.[59][60] When the Client says he is willing to pay half-price for proof of termination,[61][62] Pershing objects and says the child should be delivered alive.[62][63] Pershing appears again in "Chapter 3: The Sin", when the Mandalorian delivers the Child to the Client.[64] Later, when discussing the Child, the Client orders Pershing to "extract the necessary material and be done with it", but Pershing again protests, noting their employer has explicitly ordered them to bring the Child back alive.[55][65] The Mandalorian later returns to the Imperial compound to rescue the child, killing all the stormtroopers there and finding Pershing with the Child, who is sedated and strapped into laboratory equipment. When the Mandalorian threatens Pershing, the scientist pleads for mercy and insists he protected the Child and prevented him from being killed.[61] The Mandalorian takes the Child and leaves Pershing unharmed.[66] </p>

<p> Pershing is portrayed by Omid Abtahi,[70] who previously voiced a Mandalorian character named Amis in the animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars.[71] Pershing's costume includes a patch on his right arm with an insignia similar to one worn by clones in the cloning facility on the planet Kamino in the prequel film Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones.[65][72] This has led to speculation among some fans and writers that Pershing's plans for the Child involve cloning.[70][73] Pershing also wears glasses, making him the first human live-action character in Disney's Star Wars canon to do so. This was contrary to a rule Star Wars creator George Lucas imposed, before selling the franchise to Disney, that no character wear glasses in the Star Wars universe.[74] Pershing's costume, which also included a grey shirt with white shoulders and a high collar, was ranked eighth on a Screen Rant list of the ten best costumes in the first season of The Mandalorian.[75] Inverse writer Allie Gemmill called Dr. Pershing an interesting character, particularly due to the mystery behind his possible association with Kamino.[76] </p>

<p> IG-11 is a bounty hunter droid who initially attempts to capture and kill the Child,[91][92] but is later reprogrammed to become its nurse and protector.[93][94] The Mandalorian first encounters IG-11 when both attempt to collect the bounty on the Child. They work together to extract the Child from a gang of mercenaries,[92][95] but when IG-11 tries to kill the Child, the Mandalorian instead shoots and kills the droid.[92][96] IG-11's remains are recovered by Kuiil, who repairs and reprograms him.[97] The droid later joins the Mandalorian on a mission to Nevarro to protect the Child from the Imperial remnant,[98] and though the Mandalorian does not initially trust him,[82] IG-11 ultimately sacrifices his own life to protect the Child and his allies.[99][100] In the season 3 finale, IG-11 is finally rebuilt and becomes new marshal of Nevarro. </p>

<p> Moff Gideon is the leader of an Imperial remnant and the primary antagonist of The Mandalorian.[162][163] Few details of his backstory have yet been revealed. He was previously an operative in the Imperial Security Bureau, a covert intelligence arm and secret police for the Empire,[164][165] and played a role in past efforts to eliminate the Mandalorians.[166][167] In The Mandalorian, Moff Gideon is attempting to abduct the Child to extract its blood for experimentation.[67][168] In the first season, Gideon briefly traps the Mandalorian and his allies on Nevarro in an unsuccessful attempt to obtain the Child.[166][169] Gideon reveals he knows secret details about the Mandalorian and his allies,[170][171] and is the first character in the series to reveal the Mandalorian's real name, Din Djarin.[169][171] In the final scene of the first season finale "Chapter 8: Redemption", it is revealed that Gideon possesses the Darksaber, a Mandalorian lightsaber.[172][173] </p>

<p> Gideon returns in the second season as he continues to track down Grogu. "Chapter 12: The Siege" reveals that Gideon requires access to Grogu's blood, which contains a high 'M-count', for it to be transfused into a test subject.[67][174][68] However, the experiments have thus far resulted in "catastrophic failure".[68][175] Later in the season, Gideon apprehends Grogu and seeks to continue the experimentation, but the Mandalorian captures Dr. Pershing and infiltrates Gideon's ship.[176] Gideon battles the Mandalorian with the Darksaber, but is ultimately defeated. As a platoon of Dark Troopers attempt to rescue him, Luke Skywalker arrives and destroys the droids.[177] Gideon attempts suicide, but is incapacitated by Cara Dune.[178] Grogu is taken by Skywalker to be trained as a Jedi.[67] </p>

<p> The "Frog Lady" is a female frog-like creature who appears in "Chapter 10: The Passenger" and "Chapter 11: The Heiress". She enlists the Mandalorian to take her and her eggs to the moon Trask to be reunited with her husband, who can fertilize the eggs, in exchange for information on other Mandalorians' whereabouts. She doesn't speak Galactic Basic, but briefly uses the damaged droid Q9-0's vocabulator to communicate with the Mandalorian. Because of the eggs' fragility, they have to travel at "sub-light", and end up crashing on an icy planet to avoid a X-wing fighter patrol who have an arrest warrant for the Mandalorian since he has helped break out Qin from the New Republic transport. They are nearly killed by a swarm of spider-like Krynka, but are rescued by the X-Wing pilots who let the Mandalorian go with a warning because he assisted in the capture of the others involved in the prison break. After completing repairs, they manage to continue their journey to Trask. </p>

<p> After Dark Troopers make off with Grogu, the Mandalorian later asks Cara Dune about where Mayfeld is being held. She finds information stating that Mayfeld was sentenced to 50 years on the Karthon Chop Fields. Dune has him put on work release so that they can get to an Imperial console on Morak. Mayfeld and a disguised Mandalorian make it to the Imperial Rhydonium refinery after fighting off some pirates. The terminal Mayfeld needs is in the officer's mess hall, but Mayfeld sees his former commanding officer Valin Hess and fears being recognized. The Mandalorian goes instead but the terminal requires a facial scan, and he removes his helmet to acquire the codes. He is confronted by Hess, but Mayfeld intervenes. After a tense drink where Hess insults dead soldiers from Operation: Cinder[o] on Burnin Konn, an angered Mayfeld shoots Hess dead. The Mandalorian and Mayfeld fight their way past the stormtroopers and shoretroopers until Boba Fett extracts them. Then Mayfeld blows up the refinery using the Rhydonium supply from their convoy. After getting what they need, Dune and the Mandalorian allow Mayfeld to leave while covering this up by stating that he was killed in action. </p>

<p> In "Chapter 9: The Marshal", the Mandalorian is told to seek out Cobb by people who had mistaken him for an actual Mandalorian because of his armor. When the Mandalorian meets Cobb and finds out the truth, he demands that Cobb remove his armor. Their stand-off is interrupted by the attack of a Krayt dragon that has been terrorizing Mos Pelgo, and Cobb persuades the Mandalorian to assist him in killing it in exchange for the armor. Together, they form an unlikely alliance between the townspeople and the Tusken Raiders to eliminate their common enemy, before the Mandalorian comes up with a strategy to use a Bantha as a suicide bomber and have it detonate once the dragon eats it. When the plan fails, the Mandalorian decides to allow himself to be eaten as well in order to manually detonate the explosives, and entrusts Cobb to look after the Child, should he perish. The Mandalorian survives and, with the dragon slain, he parts ways amicably with Cobb, who hands him his armor. </p>

<p> Ahsoka Tano is a Togruta, former Jedi Padawan to Anakin Skywalker, and whom the Mandalorian seeks out in order to return the Child to his species. When on Corvus, she attacked Calodan in order for Morgan Elsbeth to divulge to her the location of her master. The Mandalorian met Ahsoka Tano, and she was able to interact with The Child without words as they can feel each other's thoughts. Ahsoka then reveals that Grogu is the Child's name. She mentions that Grogu is only the second living being of his species that Ahsoka has encountered, the first being Master Yoda. After testing one of Grogu's abilities, Ahsoka didn't want to train him due to the bad path he might take. The Mandalorian and Ahsoka work together to liberate Calodan from Elsbeth who is defeated by Ahsoka. She gives the unseen answer to Ahsoka on where her master Grand Admiral Thrawn is. Before the Mandalorian and Grogu take their leave, Ahsoka directs them to Tython, where there are the ruins of an old temple. If his calls are answered by another Jedi, he will be trained by that Jedi. </p>

<p> ^ Sean Keane of CNET said Sedaris was "excellent" as Peli, writing that she "oozes charisma" and displayed general warmth in her scenes with the Child.[130] Vulture writer Jackson McHenry said the character was effective because she bears similarities to Sedaris' real-life persona, including her "semi-ironic detachment and amusement".[136] Keith Phipps, also of Vulture, said Peli was a multifaceted character, showing sympathy for the Child while simultaneously appearing shrewd and vaguely threatening while negotiating with the Mandalorian.[137] Jason Wiese of CinemaBlend described Peli as "joyously funny" and said she would enjoy seeing a spin-off series focusing specifically on her.[138] Rachel Leishman of The Mary Sue said she loved Sedaris' appearance, saying the actress brought "the Amy Sedaris energy we know and love" to the part.[139] Gizmodo writer Germain Lussier called Sedaris' casting another example of the "kind of odd, yet wonderful intersection of Star Wars and comedy" prevalent in The Mandalorian.[128] Many fans and reviewers complimented Peli Motto's wig,[137][140] while others said her hair and jumpsuit-like costume bore similarities to Alien franchise protagonist Ellen Ripley.[127][141][142] Peli Motto was in included Vulture's list of the show's 15 best cameo appearances from season one,[136] and her costume was ranked fifth on a Screen Rant list of the ten best costumes in the first season of The Mandalorian.[75] </p>

<p> ^ Toro Calican made Vulture's list of the show's 15 best cameo appearances from season one. Vulture writer Jackson McHenry complimented Cannavale, but said the character was "not the most glamorous part".[136] Germain Lussier of Gizmodo called the introduction of a character at the start of his bounty hunting career a "very intriguing twist".[128] Collider writer Vinne Mancuso called Toro a "strange character", but ultimately an inconsequential one since he was killed so quickly.[202] Gregory Lawrence, also of Collider, describing him as a "romcom villainous douche".[203] Tyler Hersko of IndieWire called Toro a "petulant" character less appealing than other antagonists on The Mandalorian.[204] Screen Rant writer Jessie Atkin called Toro a "poor caricature" with "annoying" dialogue, and criticized the show for recycling old ideas like him instead of exploring new territory. Atkin wrote: "Toro Calican was obviously supposed to be a lame knock off of Han Solo, haha, we get the joke, but boy is it one fans don't need to see again."[205] </p>

<p> ^ Xi'an was ranked tenth on a Screen Rant list of the 10 most interesting characters from the first season of The Mandalorian,[35] and also made Vulture's list of the show's 15 best cameo appearances from season one.[136] Joseph Stanichar of The Post praised Tena's performance and "chaotic energy".[235] Vulture writer Jackson McHenry complimented the character's make-up, and appreciated the character for "bringing out some more humanity" from the Mandalorian.[136] Noah Howell of Niner Times enjoyed Xi'an's chaotic style and called her "another interesting piece to the puzzle" for the Mandalorian, complimenting how she fleshes out the protagonist's backstory.[83] Thrillist writer Dave Gonzales said Tena did a great job portraying Xi'an, praising the small touches she gave the character.[236] Elite Daily writer Ani Bundel felt the character was worthy of her own spin-off series.[237] Dan Brooks, a writer with The Mandalorian production company Lucasfilm, complimented the character and said he hoped to see more of her in the future.[238] Kevin Pantoja of Screen Rant said Xi'An was too over-the-top at times, but "there's still a lot to like about her".[35] Rolling Stone writer Alan Sepinwall said Xi'an's personality is basically limited to one trait, which is "erratic".[239] Matt Webb Mitovich of TVLine disliked the character, whom he described as "scenery-chewing".[240] Deseret News writer Herb Scribner called the character "boring".[241] IGN writer Joe Skrebels called Xi'an possibly the worst The Mandalorian character to date, describing her as "a mess of sneers, giggles, hisses (inexplicably) and absolutely nothing else".[216] Megan Crouse Den of Geek felt Xi'an and the others in her crew were too "hapless" and did not come across as efficient mercenaries.[242] </p>

<p> ^ Alan Sepinwall of Rolling Stone said Brown's performance as Burg "has me wishing for a parallel reality where he got to play Hellboy when he was younger". But he also said Burg is basically limited to one trait, which is "hot-tempered".[239] Kerr Lordygan of TV Fanatic called Brown "the coolest guest star in this episode, and possibly thus far in the series".[253] Likewise, Collider writer Vinnie Mancuso declared Burg his favorite character on The Mandalorian.[254] Noah Howell of Niner Times praised Burg's makeup and Brown's performance, saying he did not recognize the actor until seeing his name in the credits.[83] Joseph Stanichar of The Post praised the energy of Brown, who he said delivered an "expert performance".[235] Popular Mechanics writer Darren Orf called Burg a "great addition" to The Mandalorian.[255] Katie Rife of The A.V. Club called him "overtly villainous", but said he was a "worthy adversary" for the Mandalorian.[243] The Ringer writer Ben Lindbergh called him "a heck of a henchman".[208] Not all reviews were positive. IGN writer Joe Skrebels called him "as one-note as you'd fear from someone described literally only as 'the muscle'."[216] Megan Crouse of Den of Geek wrote that Burg and the other characters in the crew "didn't work for me because I didn't believe in them as mercenaries. They're so hapless."[242] </p>

<p> ^ Popular Mechanics writer Darren Orf complimented the "deadly game of hide-and-seek" between Q9-0 and the Child and enjoyed the fact that Q9-0 was not used for comedic effect, as droids often are in Star Wars. He called it a "nice change", and compared the character to HK-47, a droid featured in the video game Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic (2003).[255] Conversely, Craig Elvy of Screen Rant felt Ayoade brought deadpan humor to the character's voice, "adding comedic layers to a relatively brief role".[259] Dustin Pinney of Comic Book Resources said Q9-0 was "impeccably voiced" by Ayoade,[261] and Scott Snowden of Space.com said Ayoade's "unique voice" helped make Q9-0 a "great addition" to the episode.[209] Noah Howell of Niner Times called him a "solid" character.[83] /Film writer Bryan Young called him a "fascinating" character.[262] Mike Reyes of CinemaBlend ranked Q9-0 tenth on a list of the "10 Most Iconic Star Wars droids, though he wrote: "we don't really get too much of a sense of Zero's total personality".[263] Not all reviews were positive. IGN writer Joe Skrebels described Zero as "somehow more robotic than any other droid in the Star Wars universe".[216] </p>

<p> ^ Bryan Young of /Film said Omera "steals every scene she's in" and had such excellent chemistry with the Mandalorian that it "truly hurts" when he cannot stay with her at the end of the episode.[275] Forbes writer Erik Kane described Omera as a "great new female character introduced into a show that's been mostly men", and said he wanted to learn more about the character.[285] Vulture writer Liz Shannon Miller said Omera is a familiar archetype, but she appreciated that the character took a leadership role in the village and during the fighting scenes, and that she was not reduced to a background role due to her gender.[283] Not all reviews were positive. Kathryn VanArendonk, also of Vulture, wrote that Omera had "zero characterization except that she is a good, protective mother".[286] Anthony Gramuglia of Comic Book Resources wrote that some fans criticized Omera and the presence of other strong women in The Mandalorain because they felt it was "forced diversity". Gramuglia said these objections were misogynist and "patently ridiculous".[287] </p>

<p> ^ Robinson, Joanna (December 6, 2019). "Still Watching: The Mandalorian — "Chapter Five: The Gunslinger" with Bryce Dallas Howard and Ming-Na Wen" (Podcast). Vanity Fair. Event occurs at 33:43–34:22. Archived from the original on July 7, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2020. We were both really excited that Ming-Na Wen was on this show. If this is the end of her, which it kind of seems like it is, if this is just like a short appearance... I would've really dug like a whole long night with the Mandalorian and Fennec Shand, like, sitting up against some rocks, trading barbs or something like that. I think there's real potential for a character like this. I mean, The Mandalorian's a very action-heavy show, but I really feel like with a performer like Ming-Na Wen, with a character as coiled, there's like this coiled power in her, and I feel like we could've gotten some fun mind games out of her. </p>

<p> ^ Esposito, Giancarlo (September 22, 2019). Giancarlo Esposito Opens Up About 'Exciting' Role in 'The Mandalorian' (Exclusive). Entertainment Tonight. Event occurs at 1:38–2:29. Archived from the original on January 25, 2020. Retrieved January 25, 2020. I've worked with him three times. Once on the pilot of Revolution, a show I did with Eric Kripke that was so wonderful. Made his acquaintance, and then he asked me to do a Destiny commercial where I was reaching Rudyard Kipling, and we started to talk about The Lion King and Disney movies that we really really loved, so he tapped me for Jungle Book and I was able to do that with him. He is very specific and wonderful because he's an actor. So you get an actor directing you, he knows what you're feeling inside, he knows where you're going, and he gives you suggestions you can really utilize and use. Not just about, 'Oh, here go, stand there we want to do a shot like this.' Explains the shot and says, What do you feel inside you?' That's a respectful, wonderful actor turned director turned writer turned producer. The incredible and fabulous Jon Favreau. </p>

<p> Scroll-able PDF Pop-Out for Fullscreen Notes for PDF version 3.0 After the last update, Disney and Lucasfilm kicked it into high gear! When it sounded like "you're getting one trailer and that's it!" turned into, "you get one theatrical trailer, but look at all these TV spots and specials!" There's been so many things released in the last two weeks it has taken this long to compile and process everything into a script. Then along comes a second source for the shooting blocks that formed a major basis of most site's speculation about the plot. This doc has led to further confidence across the board as well as tons of details on Act 3 that were previously hidden. Overall this has lead to one of the biggest edits and overhauls of the Spoilerboard since we started compiling plot rumors earlier last year. What it has yielded is what we believe to be the closest thing you're going to get to an accurate plot outline prior to the film's release. Sure there might be a few details off here or there, but overall we believe this is it. If you read 3.0, you might as well have read the novel adaptation prior to seeing the film. We think it is that close. Act 3 still has confidence ratings of 50% on average, but that's because we only have one source of the info, but that source has been solid on everything else thus far. Other sites like MSW have been using this shooting outline for the plot and we have always agreed with them for the most part. This is as legit as we're going to get. That said, there's bound to be a few more nuggets of joy just prior to release. Someone might actually see the film and confirm or deny aspects. We might get a sneak peak or two at some of the hidden info - for example - what does Snoke look like? Will we ever get a really good picture of Maz? Maybe, but not likely. So if you're ready to read the plot and get a sense for what you're going to see Nov 17, read away - and do send us comments here or directly to T_H_G on /r/StarWarsLeaks. Enjoy and thank you for sharing the fun of Star Wars with us. Other details </p>

<p> A new Star Wars movie — starring Ryan Gosling and directed by Shawn Levy — will be released in 2027, the two announced Friday at the "Star Wars Celebration" (a fan event in Japan). CNN reports: Set to begin production this fall, the movie will be set approximately five years after "Star Wars: Episode IX — The Rise of Skywalker," released in 2019, but will sit outside the Skywalker story as a standalone film. "The film... is an entirely new adventure featuring all-new characters set in a period of time that has not been explored on screen," said a statement from Lucasfilm, the owner of the "Star Wars" franchise... "The script is just so good, the story, it has so much adventure, so much heart and original character. It's an opportunity to shine the light into a side of the universe that we may not have seen," Gosling said. Levy, the director of "Deadpool & Wolverine," told the crowd the film would have all the "fun of 'Star Wars'" but it would be done "in ways that are new and original...." The next movie in the franchise, "The Mandalorian & Grogu," a spin-off of "The Mandalorian" series, directed by Jon Favreau, will hit cinemas in May 2026. USA Today notes that more new Star Wars movies have also been announced: Daisy Ridley is set to star in a film that will see her character, Rey, building a new Jedi Order after the events of "The Rise of Skywalker." [This is sometimes referred to as "Star Wars Episode X: New Jedi Order."] "Logan" filmmaker James Mangold has also been tapped to direct a movie about the dawn of the Jedi, and [Dave] Filoni is directing one said to "close out the interconnected stories" told in the live-action Disney+ shows like "The Mandalorian." </p>

<p> Obi-Wan discovers a huge clone factory on Kamino. The Kaminoins warmly welcome the Jedi mistakenly believing he's come to check on the progress of the clone army they say is for the Republic. Obi-Wan learns the clones were ordered by Sifo-Dyas, a Master Jedi Knight killed ten years ago. (Sifo-Dyas, a dissatisfied Jedi, was manipulated by a Sith Lord and placed the order on the Sith's behalf. He was then killed.) Bounty hunter Jango Fett was hired as the DNA donor. As part of his payment, he was given an unaltered clone "son", he named Boba. Obi-Wan asks if Jango knew Sifo-Dyas, but he says someone named Tyranus recruited him. Obi-Wan transmits a message to Yoda and Mace Windu reporting on the clone army and that Jango is the assassin they are looking for. Blinded to the army's existence, Yoda and Mace-Windu realise the Jedi's power to use the Force has diminished. Obi-Wan attempts to capture Jango, but he and Boba escape. Before they take off, Obi-Wan attaches a tracking device to the ship's hull. He follows Jango to the planet Geonosis and learns the Separatists are building a massive droid army there. </p>

<p> On Naboo, Anakin and Padme are alone together for the first time. Anakin's been in love with Padme since they met ten years before, but she only sees the little boy she once knew. Gradually her feelings deepen, but she's unwilling for Anakin to risk his future as a Jedi. Recently, Anakin has experienced disturbing dreams about his mother. Determined to find her, Anakin goes to Tatooine. Padme accompanies him. Seeking out his former master, Anakin learns his mother, Shmi was sold to farmer Cliegg Lars who freed and married her. At the Lars' farm, Anakin learns Shmi was captured by Tusken Raiders a month before and is believed dead. He finds the Tusken's camp, but Shmi is barely alive. Only briefly can she look upon her son and speak a few words before she dies. Driven by grief and rage Anakin slaughters the Tuskens, including the women and children. From afar, Yoda senses a deep disturbance in the Force. </p>

<p> As the Clone War nears its end, a huge spaceship battle rages over Coruscant. General Grievous, the evil head of the Separatist droid army has captured the Republic leader, Chancellor Palpatine, and is holding him hostage aboard his star ship. Anakin and Obi-Wan Kenobi infiltrate the vessel and confront Sith Lord Darth Tyranus (Count Dooku). The Jedi fight Tyranus and Obi-Wan is knocked unconscious. Anakin defeats Tyranus, slicing off his hands and literally bringing him to his knees. Urged on by the chancellor, Anakin beheads Tyranus with his lightsaber. But Anakin is deeply disturbed and appalled by his actions - a Jedi would never commit such an unnecessary and heinous act. Palpatine is freed and Obi-Wan regains consciousness, but the trio is quickly captured and taken to General Grievous on the bridge. The Jedi destroy his Magna Guards, but Grievous escapes. As Grievous’ heavily damaged spaceship crashes towards the planet, Anakin takes control and lands it safely. Yoda sends Obi-Wan to the Utapau system to find and capture General Grievous and the other separatists. At Darth Sidious’ command, Grievous is relocating the separatist leaders to the molten planet Mustafa. </p>

<p> Before negotiations begin, the viceroy attempts to assassinate Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan, but the two Jedi escape to the planet surface. They have discovered a droid invasion army hidden aboard the Federation ship. With the help of Jar Jar Binks, an outcast gungan (aquatic-living creatures), they make their way to Queen Amadala's palace in Theed. To avoid signing the treaty, Amidala escapes with Qui-Gon, Obi-Wan and Jar Jar Binks and heads to Coruscant, the galactic seat of government. Amidala intends to present her case to the galactic senate. En route, they divert to the desert planet Tatooine for repairs to their damaged ship. At a salvage shop, Qui-Gon, Padme (Amadala), and Jar Jar meet Anakin Skywalker, a young slave boy. Watto, Anakin's master, refuses to sell the part Qui-Gon needs for Republic credits, and Qui-Gon must somehow raise money. As a sudden desert storm approaches, Anakin offers the group refuge at his home. Qui-Gon discovers Anakin possesses undeveloped Jedi abilities and believes he may be the Chosen One destined to return balance to the Force. He's further convinced when Anakin's mother, Shmi, says Anakin was conceived without a biological father. </p>

<p> Ten years after the invasion of Naboo, the Galactic Republic is facing a Separatist movement and the former queen and now Senator Padmé Amidala travels to Coruscant to vote on a project to create an army to help the Jedi to protect the Republic. Upon arrival, she escapes from an attempt to kill her, and Obi-Wan Kenobi and his Padawan Anakin Skywalker are assigned to protect her. They chase the shape-shifter Zam Wessell but she is killed by a poisoned dart before revealing who hired her. The Jedi Council assigns Obi-Wan Kenobi to discover who has tried to kill Amidala and Anakin to protect her in Naboo. Obi-Wan discovers that the dart is from the planet Kamino, and he heads to the remote planet. He finds an army of clones that has been under production for years for the Republic and that the bounty hunter Jango Fett was the matrix for the clones. Meanwhile Anakin and Amidala fall in love with each other, and he has nightmarish visions of his mother. They travel to his home planet, Tatooine, to see his mother, and he discovers that she has been abducted by Tusken Raiders. Anakin finds his mother dying, and he kills all the Tusken tribe, including the women and children. Obi-Wan follows Jango Fett to the planet Geonosis where he discovers who is behind the Separatist movement. He transmits his discoveries to Anakin since he cannot reach the Jedi Council. Who is the leader of the Separatist movement? Will Anakin receive Obi-Wan's message? And will the secret love between Anakin and Amidala succeed?—Claudio Carvalho, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil </p>

<p> Meanwhile, Anakin and Padmé spend time together on Naboo, and Anakin reveals his love for her. Padmé resists, explaining that it would be impossible for the two of them to be together; she is a respected Senator, and the Jedi Code forbids marriage or any other form of attachment. Anakin is soon troubled by dreams in which his mother, Shmi (Pernilla August), is in danger and dying. He asks Padmé to accompany him to Tatooine. Upon arriving, Anakin learns that his mother was sold by his former master to a moisture farmer who lives outside of Mos Esley. Anakin and Padame arrive at the Lars farm where he meets his stepbrother Owen and his fiancee Beru as well as his stepfather Kleg Lars, who married Shmi. Anakin learns that his mother had been kidnapped one month earlier by local Tusken Raiders. Anakin tracks her to a Tusken camp, where he finds her in poor condition, and within moments she dies in his arms. In a fit of rage, he slaughters the entire Tusken community. Anakin brings his mother's body back to her home, where her funeral is held. </p>

<p> When the Trade Federation organize a blockade around the planet Naboo, the Supreme Chancellor Valorum sends the Jedi Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi to negotiate the end of the blockade. However the evil Viceroy Nute Gunray is ordered to kill the Jedi and invade Naboo. However the Jedi escape and Qui-Gon saves the life of the clumsy Gungan Jar Jar Binks. The outcast native takes the Jedi to his submerged city and the Gungan leader gives transportation to them. The Jedi head to the capital to warn Queen Amidala about the invasion. However she has been captured by the Federation droids but the Jedi rescue the queen and her court and they flee in a spacecraft that is damaged when they cross the blockade. They land on a desert planet and Qui-Gon Jinn goes to the town with Jar Jar, the droid R2-D2 and the queen's assistant Padmé to seek the necessary part for the spacecraft. When they find the component, they do not have money to buy it. But the slave boy Anakin Skywalker offers to dispute a race with his pod to raise the necessary money. Qui-Gon feels the Force in the boy and accepts his offer. Will the boy win the race? What will happen to Naboo? Will Queen Amidala be capable to convince the politicians to release her planet from the Trade Federation?—Claudio Carvalho, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil </p>

<p> The opening crawl reveals that the Trade Federation, led by its viceroy, Nute Gunray, has blockaded the planet of Naboo in hope of resolving a galactic trade dispute. Chancellor Valorum (Terence Stamp) of the Galactic Republic, sends Jedi Knights Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) and his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) on a secret mission to meet with the Trade Federation to settle the crisis. Unknown to them, the Trade Federation is in league with the mysterious Sith Lord Darth Sidious, who orders them to invade Naboo with their immense droid army and also to kill the two Jedi. Following a failed attempt to force their way into Gunray's command center, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan escape and flee to the surface of Naboo, where they meet local Gungan outcast Jar Jar Binks (Ahmed Best). As Jar Jar brings them to an underwater Gungan settlement, the Trade Federation captures Naboo's leader, Queen Amidala (Natalie Portman). Through a Jedi mind trick, Qui-Gon secures a submarine, which he, Obi-Wan, and Jar Jar use to reach the capital of Naboo and rescue Queen Amidala and her escort. The group departs for Coruscant, the Galactic Republic's capital planet, to seek help from the Senate. </p>

<p> During the escape, the ship is attacked by the Federation blockade, forcing R2-D2, one of the ship's droids, to fix the shields. The attack damages the ship's hyperdrive, forcing the party to land on the desert planet of Tatooine for repairs. While searching for needed parts, Qui-Gon and a handmaiden named Padmé befriend young Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd), a nine-year-old human slave gifted in piloting and mechanics. Qui-Gon senses a strong presence of the Force in Anakin, and feels that he may be the "Chosen One" an individual the Jedi believe will fulfill a prophecy by bringing balance to the Force. Anakin's master, Watto turns out to own the parts required to repair Amidala's ship, but Qui-Gon has no way of paying him, as the Republic's currency is worthless on Tattooine. At Anakin's insistence, Qui-Gon enters Anakin in the Boonta Eve Podrace in a bet with Watto, to gain the needed parts and Anakin's freedom. Anakin eludes several obstacles including rival racer Sebulba to win the race, gaining his freedom and bankrupting Watto. After hesitation, Anakin leaves his mother and his droid, C-3PO (Anthony Daniels), behind on Tatooine to go with the Jedi. As the group prepares to depart, they are attacked by the Sith apprentice Darth Maul (Ray Park), who battles Qui-Gon until the heroes escape. </p>

<p> On Naboo, Padmé reveals herself as Queen Amidala and forms an alliance with the Gungans for the battle against the Trade Federation. The Gungans march into battle to divert the Federation army away from the capital, allowing the others to infiltrate the palace. Once inside the palace hangar, the Jedi free several Naboo pilots, who regain their starfighters and assault the Federation droid ship. As they make their way to the throne room, the infiltration team is confronted by Darth Maul. Qui-Gon and Obi Wan engage Maul while the others take an alternate route. Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan duel with the Sith Lord amongst the catwalks of a massive power-generating reactor core. Obi-Wan is briefly delayed, separating him from Qui-Gon and Maul. Meanwhile, Queen Amidala and her forces fight their way into the palace and capture Nute Gunray, Viceroy of the Trade Federation. Anakin - who inadvertently joined the dogfight in space - destroys the droid-control ship's reactor with proton torpedoes, which deactivates the droid army in the midst of taking Gungan prisoners. In the reactor core, Qui-Gon re-engages Darth Maul singlehandedly, but is mortally wounded. Obi-Wan catches up with and defeats Maul in another intense lightsaber battle. With his final breath, Qui-Gon instructs Obi-Wan to train Anakin to become a Jedi. </p>

<p> Meanwhile, Luke and R2-D2 make a crash landing on the swamp planet of Dagobah. Frustrated at his X-Wing having landed in a bog, Luke makes camp and begins to eat his rations. Luke muses about how the surrounding area seems familiar when he's startled by a strange voice behind him, a wizened, green little creature who acts obnoxiously, demanding to keep a small power lamp of Luke's and criticizes the rations Luke eats. Telling Luke that he knows where to find Yoda, Luke goes to his small house to eat. While there, Luke quickly grows impatient, wanting to meet Yoda immediately. The small creature begins to talk to the spirit of Obi-Wan, saying that Luke is too old to begin Jedi training and that he hasn't learned the patience a Jedi requires. Luke realizes that the creature is Yoda himself. Yoda insists that Luke harbors much anger like his father, Anakin. Obi-Wan assures Yoda that Luke will learn patience and will complete his training. Luke tells Yoda that he is not afraid, to which Yoda gravely replies, "You will be." </p>

<p> In space once again, the Falcon is again chased by a Star Destroyer, but Han evades pursuit cleverly and stealthily: after soaring into an attack position, he flies directly over the bridge of the star destroyer and hides the Falcon on the massive ship's surface, attaching to it with the Falcon's landing claws. They go undetected while Han figures out an escape plan. He surmises that the fleet will dump their refuse before jumping to hyperspace and they can float away unnoticed. Han checks his navigational log and realizes he's been in the area before and that a planet called Bespin is nearby and that they'll find one of his old smuggling buddies there who will offer them refuge. Unfortunately, their escape is not unanticipated; following just behind him is a smaller ship, Slave I, piloted by Fett who is working out where the Millennium Falcon is likely going. Han's escape plan works and he sets course for Cloud City, a gas mining colony on the nearby gas planet of Bespin, which is run by Han's friend, Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams). </p>

<p> In a time of conflict and tyranny, the Empire is on the brink of unleashing its most fearsome weapon, the Death Star. A small band of unlikely heroes comes together in a desperate attempt to steal the plans to this planet-destroying power. Jyn Erso, a young woman with a personal connection to the Death Star's creator, is reluctantly recruited by the Rebel Alliance. Joined by Cassian Andor, a committed intelligence officer, the reprogrammed Imperial droid K-2SO, and a diverse group of fighters and outcasts, they embark on a perilous mission that takes them deep into enemy territory. Their journey leads them to new planets, where they encounter both allies and adversaries, each with their own agendas and secrets. The team must navigate complex moral landscapes and make difficult choices, all while racing against time. The film explores themes of sacrifice, hope, and the moral complexities of war. It's a tale of ordinary people rising to the challenge of extraordinary circumstances, united by a common goal. The film adds texture and depth to the Star Wars universe, providing a gritty and grounded perspective on events that shape the original trilogy.—Evan Almindo </p>

<p> Meanwhile, Jyn, K-2SO, and Cassian arrive at Jedha. K-2SO is told to wait at the ship, and while Cassian scouts the area, Jyn is approached by Chirrut Imwe (Donnie Yen), a blind warrior who notices her necklace and the quality of the stone. Later, when Jyn and Cassian roam the city, they notice snipers and the area quickly erupts into a battle. Rebel and Empire forces fight and, while Jyn and Cassian take care of the stormtrooper, K-2SO arrives and defeats the last set of stormtroopers that arrive on the scene. As they leave the area, they run into another squad of stormtroopers who want to detain them. Chirrut tries asking the stormtroopers to let them go but is attacked by the stormtroopers. Showing excellent skill despite his visual impairment, Chirrut defeats the stormtroopers with a little help from Baze Malbus (Wen Jiang), but they are captured by Saw's crew. </p>

<p> The First Order, led by the evil Kylo Ren, is landing stormtroopers to attack a small village, as Poe Dameron meets with Lor San Tekka in a hut. He is given a small bag containing the map to Luke Skywalker. Kylo Ren orders the stormtroopers to destroy Lor San Tekka's entire village and takes Poe captive. Captain Phasma, a stormtrooper wearing chrome-plated armor, leads the attack. Poe's X-Wing is damaged so that he cannot escape, so the pilot puts the map in a rolling droid unit called BB-8. To cover BB-8's escape, Dameron guns down a stormtrooper, and the trooper's comrade, FN-2187, stops to check his wounds. The dying stormtrooper reaches up and drags his bloody hand across his companion's helmet, leaving blood streaks behind. FN-2187 then wakes up to the chaos of the battle around him. Kylo Ren then walks onto the battleground and interrogates Lor San Tekka. When Tekka doesn't give up the map's whereabouts, Ren pulls out his lightsaber and kills him. Trying to avenge Tekka's death, Dameron fires at Kylo Ren, who uses the Force on the blaster bolt, suspending it in midair. Troopers bring him to Ren, who orders to search him. Finding nothing, Dameron is taken prisoner on a troop transport. As Dameron is captured, the troopers massacre the remaining prisoners, but FN-2187 refuses to fire. Meanwhile, BB-8 rolls away across the sands, narrowly escaping capture. </p>

<p> Finn wanders across the desert discarding his stormtrooper armor. Eventually, he arrives in Niima Outpost, the town where Rey trades scrap for food. While Finn is looking for water in the town, he sees Rey being attacked by two of Unkar Plutt's henchmen who are trying to make off with BB-8. He begins to rush to her aid, but before he gets far, Rey handily fights off her attackers using her staff. Clearly, she can handle herself. BB-8 spots Finn looking their way and tells Rey that he is wearing Poe's jacket, which they assume is stolen. Rey chases Finn down, knocks him to the ground and confronts Finn about the jacket. BB-8 assists by giving Finn electric shocks. Finn tells them that Poe was captured by the First Order and that he helped him escape, but Poe was unfortunately killed. BB-8 is saddened and rolls off, but Rey is excited and impressed, and assumes Finn is a resistance fighter. Finn lies, telling her he is indeed with the resistance. Rey excitedly tells Finn that BB-8 is on a secret mission. Finn tells her BB-8 is carrying a map to Luke Skywalker and Rey is astonished, declaring that she thought Skywalker was a myth. </p>

<p> BB-8 returns and alerts Finn and Rey that they are in trouble. First Order stormtroopers are now looking for Finn and the BB-8 droid. Stormtroopers chase Finn, Rey and BB-8 through Niima Outpost and TIE fighters are called in and begin to bomb and strafe the town. To make their escape, they steal a "garbage" vehicle to escape the First Order. It is the Millennium Falcon. Rey takes the pilot's seat while Finn mans the guns. Neither is confident in their abilities, and their lift off is rough, destroying a substantial portion of the town as they try to get off of the ground. Finn is able to shoot down a pursuing fighter, but the guns are hit and locked in a position that prevents him from taking out the remaining fighter. Rey flies through the wrecked ships in the desert of Jakku, occasionally scraping through the sands as they try to keep low to confuse the TIE fighter's tracking. Rey takes the Falcon into one of the Star Destroyers and just as the pursuing fighter locks onto their ship, she turns the Falcon out into the open, and performs a flip which allows Finn to fire successfully at the remaining fighter, taking it down. They head off, away from Jakku, and on toward the wider galaxy. Not having flown in years, the Falcon is not in good repair, and almost immediately requires an emergency patch. Rey begins repairing the ship while Finn admits to BB-8 he is not part of the resistance, but is still able to convince BB-8 to tell them where the Resistance base is. </p>

<p> Rey knows the history of the ship, and how to repair and fly it. Han is impressed, but the ship is then boarded by two more smuggler parties. Han is trying his hand at smuggling again, this time by carrying some menacing Rathtars. Han tries to talk his way out of his debts with the two smuggling groups while Rey and Finn escape. Rey tries to close blast doors to save Han, but instead opens the doors to the Rathtar containers. The Rathtars attack and eat the smugglers and almost get Finn, but Rey saves him by closing a door on the creature's tentacles, severing them. The heroes escape in the Millennium Falcon and leave their attackers behind. The new-found allies travel to the green planet of Takodana to seek help from Maz Kanata, a short, orange skinned alien. There they are spotted in the cantina by both First Order and Resistance spies. Kylo Ren sends forces to re-capture the map. Finn, still fearful of being recaptured by the First Order, admits that he is not part of the Resistance and decides to run by joining a crew heading for the outer rim. </p>

<p> The Resistance X-wing fighters arrive, finishing off the last troops. A troop ship lands carrying General Leia Organa and C-3P0. Han and Leia are reunited, but their relations are tense. It is revealed that Kylo Ren is actually their son. The heroes return to the Resistance Base, where Finn is reunited with Poe Dameron, who was not killed by the crash on Jakku, but instead was thrown from the crash when it hit. When Poe notices that Finn is wearing his jacket, he tells him to keep it. BB-8 is reunited with R2-D2 and C-3P0, but R2-D2 has been in shut down since Luke left many years before. The Resistance fighters begin to plan an attack on the Starkiller Base to avoid being wiped out. It is shown that the Base feeds on suns for power, absorbing its energy to power the laser. Finn wants to rescue Rey, and claims he once worked at Starkiller Base and knows how to knock out the shields. Han and Leia say their goodbyes as the X-wings led by Poe Dameron prepare to attack a weak point, a thermal oscillator, on the base. As they part, Leia asks Han to bring their son home if he sees him. </p>

<p> On Starkiller Base, Rey wakes to find herself locked in an interrogation chair like the one we have seen earlier in Poe's interrogation scene. She and Kylo Ren converse, and he removes his mask, revealing his face to her; he is a young and handsome man. Ren uses the Force to read Rey's mind. He senses her lonely life on Jakku, her dreams of a faraway island and the closeness she feels towards Han Solo. She reacts with hostility but seems unable to keep him from reading her thoughts. When he tries to extract the information about the map from her mind, however, he runs up against an unexpected barrier. Rey is not only able to resist his further probing, but pushes back into Ren's mind, and tells him that he is afraid that he will never be as strong as Darth Vader. Ren is shaken by this and by her obvious strength with the Force, and he runs away to meet with Snoke in search of guidance on how to proceed. Kylo Ren and General Hux are scolded for not retrieving the droid, and Ren's inability to crack Rey's mind, by the Supreme Leader, who is only revealed as a massive hologram of an old and scarred man seated on a throne towering over them. </p>

<p> Kylo Ren confronts Finn and Rey in the snowy forest. Ren is bleeding from his wound, but still ignites his red fiery saber to fight. Rey raises her blaster to fire on Ren, but he throws her against a tree with a Force push and she lies unconscious in the snow. Finn rushes to her aid and then uses the blue lightsaber to fight Ren. Finn quickly finds himself outmatched. He manages to glance Ren with the saber, but this only enrages him. Rey is revived by the sound of Finn's screams as he is burned by Ren's saber. Ren easily disarms Finn, tossing the saber off into the snow, after which, he slices Finn in the back, knocking him unconscious. He then uses the Force to pull the lightsaber to himself. It hurtles towards him but then flies past. Ren turns to discover the saber in Rey's hands. Rey is as astonished as Ren is. They begin to fight. Rey initially fights unsuccessfully and desperately and begins to run from Ren. He pursues her and pins her against the edge of a cliff. Ren offers to teach her the Force, but this only ends up reminding her to tap into its power. She closes her eyes for a moment of meditation and then attacks Ren with a new vigor and power. She rapidly gains the upper hand, extinguishes Ren's saber and slashes him on the arm and across the face. </p>

<p> Finn, Rose, and BB-8 arrive at a casino on Canto Bight. Finn is impressed with the glitz and wealth of the casino, but Rose hates the place because only the weapons dealers who sell to the Empire are rich enough to gamble there. It is also home to a number of rotten people who take pleasure in misdeeds, including cruelty to giant but gentle creatures called fathiers that are forced to race, and enslaved children who live with them in the stables as caretakers. The trio finds the Master Codebreaker (Justin Theroux) playing at a table, but the heroes get captured and thrown into a jail cell for illegally parking their ship. In their cell, Finn and Rose meet a stuttering scoundrel named DJ (Benicio Del Toro). He overhears the two of them needing a code-breaker, and he offers his services. DJ manages to open their cell and helps them escape, and they climb down to the stable. Rose, fascinated by the beautiful fathiers, stops to free one from its stable and finds a small boy inside. Frightened, he nearly pushes a panic button but Rose shows him her ring with the Resistance's symbol. They fight guards on the way out with the help of BB-8 and ride the fathiers as they stampede through the casino to get away. Finn and Rose's ship is destroyed but BB-8 and DJ bring them another one to make their escape. </p>

<p> Jedi Knight Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew), Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams), Princess Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher), C-3PO (Anthony Daniels), and R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) return to Tatooine to rescue Han Solo (who was encased in carbonite at the end of Star Wars V: Impérium vrací úder (1980)) from the gangster Jabba the Hutt (voice: Larry Ward). Luke sends C-3PO and R2-D2 to Jabba's desert palace to deliver a message: In a hologram projected by R2, Luke offers to bargain with Jabba for Solo himself -- if Jabba does not, he will be destroyed. Jabba laughs at the message and refuses to give up his "favorite decoration:" Han, frozen in carbonite, hangs on a wall in Jabba's court. The two droids are sent to EV-9D9's workshop where C-3P0 is given the job of Jabba's translator and R2 will be a drink-server on Jabba's sail barge. </p>

<p> The group is taken to the pit on Jabba's sail barge fleet, and Jabba sadistically attempts to draw out the spectacle by inviting them to grovel for their lives. Han and Chewbacca refuse, but Luke calmly notes to the gangster that he is about to pay dearly for his arrogance to Jabba's scoffing amusement. The group is prepared for execution: Luke is the first, pushed out onto a thin plank over the pit. Luke gives R2 a short salute and drops off the plank, only to spin and grab the plank to launch himself back on board. At that moment, R2 catapults a small object, Luke's new lightsaber, to the Jedi's hand. A battle erupts, with Luke steadily taking the fight to Jabba's men. During the battle, Leia strangles Jabba with the chain around her neck and with R2-D2's help escapes from her bonds. Solo accidentally knocks Boba Fett (Jeremy Bulloch) into the sarlacc pit. Lando is also thrown off one of the skiffs, hanging by a few cables until he's rescued from the sarlacc itself by Han and Chewbacca. Luke, having fought his way onto Jabba's sail barge, has the escaping Leia aim the deck cannon at the vehicle and sets it on automatic fire; the sail barge soon blows apart. Our heroes manage to escape before it explodes, retrieve R2 and C-3PO and zip off into the desert. Luke flies off Tatooine in his X-Wing fighter and the rest of the band fly away in the Millennium Falcon to rendezvous with the Rebel fleet near Sullust. </p>

<p> Finally, Yoda charges Luke with keeping alive the teachings and knowledge of the Jedi and the Force, urging him to start with his own family, with whom the Force is unusually strong. With his final breath, Yoda tells Luke that there is "another Skywalker." Yoda dies at peace, and before Luke's astonished eyes, his body vanishes, passing with his spirit into the Force. The spirit of Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness) confronts a distraught Luke, confirming that Vader was once Anakin Skywalker, a Jedi who was turned to the dark side of the Force. Obi-Wan confesses to Luke that he made mistakes in Anakin's training, especially by not deferring to Yoda, and takes responsibility for indirectly creating the evil Darth Vader. Luke counters that even now, all is not lost, that some part of Anakin remains, if only someone can reach it. When Luke asks about the other Skywalker, Obi-Wan tells him that Luke has a twin sister, hidden from Anakin and separated from Luke at birth to protect them both from the Emperor. Luke intuits that his sister is Princess Leia. Obi-Wan confirms it, but warns Luke that in the eyes of the Empire, all bonds of love and caring are potential weaknesses to be exploited. </p>

<p> When they arrive on the moon, the team happens across a small unit of Imperial biker scouts. Han tries to sneak up on the scouts to disarm them but draws their attention when he steps on a branch. Leia and Luke jump on speeder bikes and pursue two more scouts through the forest at high speed. They overtake them both but are separated; Leia's bike crashes into a tree after she jumps off and she falls unconscious. Luke jumps off his own bike and battles with the the scout he'd been pursuing, forcing him to crash using his lightsaber. When Luke rejoins the team, he finds that Leia hasn't returned. The team looks for her but is captured by indigenous creatures called Ewoks -- short, furry, intelligent forest dwellers. An Ewok called Wicket (Warwick Davis) befriends Leia, but the other Ewoks who captured the rest of the Rebel party decide to sacrifice them to C-3P0, who they believe is a god. Luke, having mastered the Force, levitates C-3P0 to impress the Ewoks with the droid's power and scare them into giving up the sacrifice. With the help of C-3PO, Luke and his party form an alliance with the Ewoks, whose stone-age technology has unexpectedly effective military applications. </p>

<p> On the Death Star, the Emperor taunts Luke to give in to his anger. A ferocious lightsaber duel has erupted between Luke and his father. In the midst of combat, Vader reads Luke's feelings and learns that Luke has a twin sister. When Vader toys with the notion of turning Leia to the dark side, Luke gives in to his rage and furiously gains the upper hand in the battle, slicing off Vader's right robotic hand in a rage in one swift cut, and makes his father succumb to defeat at the mercy of his son's blade. Despite the Emperor's goading Luke refuses to kill his father, realizing that he is traveling down his father's path towards the dark side, and declares himself a Jedi. Realizing that Luke cannot be turned, the Emperor uses Force lightning against him to torture and attempt to kill him. Deeply affected by the sight of his son dying before him, Vader repents and turns on the Emperor, throwing him down a reactor shaft to his death. At the same time, however, the Emperor's Force lightning causes fatal injuries to Vader (Anakin) and short-circuits his breathing system. Stopping momentarily in a landing bay, Anakin asks Luke to take his mask off, knowing that he'll die, but desiring to look at his son's face with his human eyes. Luke removes the helmet, revealing the pale and scarred face of his father (Sebastian Shaw). Anakin says that Luke was right about him, and asks Luke to tell his sister. With those final words, Anakin dies. </p>

<p> The droids are captured by Jawa traders who electrocute R2-D2, and sell them to moisture farmers Owen (Phil Brown) and Beru Lars (Shelagh Fraser) and their nephew, Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill). Owen needed droids who understand the binary language of Moisture Vaporators. While C3PO is a protocol droid, he is trained in the language of load filters, similar to Vaporators. He can also speak Bocce. C3PO convinces Luke to take R2-D2 as well. Owen asks Luke to clean up both droids before dinner. While Luke is cleaning R2-D2, he discovers a recording of Leia requesting help from a former ally named Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness). Luke is interested in the rebellion and wants to learn more about it. R2-D2 says that the message is a private one for Obi-Wan and that R2-D2 is his property. Obi-Wan lives on Tatooine. Luke knows of a Ben Kenobi, an old hermit, who lives beyond the dune sea. Luke - who hopes to leave home for training at a nearby Imperial Military Academy to become a space pilot - leaves the room angrily to return to cleaning the droids. Luke's Aunt Beru tells Owen that Luke is too much like his father to remain with them, but Owen holds out hope that Luke's desire for adventure will subside - and expresses a fear that Luke is too much like his father... suggesting that Owen may know something of Anakin's terrible past. Meanwhile, the Stormtroopers land on Tatooine and follow the tracks made by the Jawa trader's ship. </p>

<p> They hire Han Solo (Harrison Ford) (for 10,000 credits), a smuggler indebted to local mobster Jabba the Hutt, for a passage to Alderaan. Luke knows that for that kind of money, they can buy their own ship. Han claims that his ship the Millenium Falcon made the Kessel run in 12 parsecs and can outrun Imperial star-ships. Obi-Wan offers to pay 2000 credits upfront and 15,000 credits upon arrival. They agree to meet in bay 94. Han hangs back to take care of their bar tab and is stopped by Greedo (Paul Blake), a bounty hunter working for feared crime lord Jabba Desilijic Tiure, aka: Jabba the Hutt. Apparently, Jabba had hired Han to transport a shipment of Glitterstim spice (an illegal narcotic), but Han had to dump the shipment due to an unexpected Imperial boarding. As Greedo points a blaster pistol at Solo, Han insists that he has the 8,000 credits he needs to cover the loss. Greedo suggests that Solo give it to him as a bribe not to turn him over to Jabba, forcing Han to admit that he doesn't actually have the money yet. Solo quietly removes his heavy pistol under the table, and Pre-Emptively fires and kills him. On his way out, Han throws the bartender a few coins, apologizing for "the mess" he left. </p>

<p> Luke and Han reach Leia's floor and rescue her from her cell, after dispatching the security. Leia comes along when she hears Obi-Wan is with the group. As reinforcements arrive, the group is forced to take a different route back through the garbage chute. But they drop into a garbage masher which starts to close in. C3PO manages to pick up a communications unit when Stormtroopers come into the control room, but do not recognize them as the escapee droids. Using the communications unit, C3PO gets in contact with Luke and with R2-D2 in the control room, they disable the garbage masher. Eventually, the 2 groups reach the hangar where the Falcon is being kept, after fighting more Stormtroopers. Obi-Wan's sacrifice allows the rest of the group to escape the Death Star (when a voice from the sky instructs Luke to escape). The Falcon fights off the TIE fighters sent after them. Using a tracking device on the Falcon, the Empire locates the Rebel base on the 4th moon around planet Yavin. Leia informs Han that R2-D2 is carrying the technical specifications of Death Star. For a moment it looks like both Luke and Han are interested in Leia. </p>

<p> Unfortunately, there are a number of times when Lucas just goes too far in his quest to improve his work. Sometimes you can only do so much to anything before it starts to look overdone. Of course, I am talking about the scene between Han and Greedo in the cantina. In the original version, we are led to believe Han is a scoundrel who only cares about himself, giving us one of the best character arcs in the whole trilogy. It is also a great tribute to Sergio Leone, a nice reference to when Tuco shoots a potential assassin from his bathtub and tells the corpse "When you have to shoot, shoot, don't talk!". Modifying this scene so it looks like Greedo shot first is an insult on a few levels. It insults Greedo as a character, making him look like one of the most incompetent bounty hunters in the galaxy. It insults the audience, who even at the age of six should no that you'd have to be blind, drunk, brain-damaged, or all three, to miss from that distance. Lastly, it insults the character of Han Solo by destroying a vital piece of said character arc. Watching Han go from scum to a leader of men, a space-age version of King Aragorn even, was one of the best things about the original Star Wars trilogy. </p>

<p> And Mark Hamil. He was perfectly cast as the whining little boy who wanted more, but was afraid to reach for it. He grows up quite well on film in these three installments, and endears himself to the audience so much the more for it. But a cast member who is almost always left out of these reviews is Peter Mayhew. Chewbacca. His character, as a supporting character to Han's, was exemplary. It's not easy portraying a walking carpet, yet holding the attention, admiration, and love of virtual millions. I am VERY happy about his being cast as Chewy in Episode 3. Couldn't happen to a more deserving...or capable...fellow. Bravo! And James Earl Jones's voice being used as the voice of Darth Vader, was pure genius. His commanding voice haunted the dreams of countless thousands of star-struck children for generations to come. I also have to say that this movie would not have had the charm it does had it not been for Anthony Daniels' C3P0. He is a gift and a joy. </p>

<p> Click here to read The Hollywood Insider’s CEO Pritan Ambroase’s love letter to Cinema, TV and Media. An excerpt from the love letter: The Hollywood Insider’s CEO/editor-in-chief Pritan Ambroase affirms, “We have the space and time for all your stories, no matter who/what/where you are. Media/Cinema/TV have a responsibility to better the world and The Hollywood Insider will continue to do so. Talent, diversity and authenticity matter in Cinema/TV, media and storytelling. In fact, I reckon that we should announce “talent-diversity-authenticity-storytelling-Cinema-Oscars-Academy-Awards” as synonyms of each other. We show respect to talent and stories regardless of their skin color, race, gender, sexuality, religion, nationality, etc., thus allowing authenticity into this system just by something as simple as accepting and showing respect to the human species’ factual diversity. We become greater just by respecting and appreciating talent in all its shapes, sizes, and forms. Award winners, which includes nominees, must be chosen on the greatness of their talent ALONE. </p>

<p> A year after Han Solo's capture and imprisonment in carbonite,[a] C-3PO and R2-D2 enter the palace of the crime lord Jabba the Hutt on Tatooine. They were sent as a goodwill gift by Luke Skywalker, who hopes to negotiate with Jabba for Han's release. Disguised as a bounty hunter, Princess Leia infiltrates the palace under the pretense of having captured Chewbacca. She releases Han from the carbonite but is caught by Jabba and enslaved. Luke arrives to bargain for the release of his friends, but Jabba drops him through a trapdoor to be eaten by a rancor. After Luke kills the beast, Jabba decrees that he, Han, and Chewbacca will be fed to a Sarlacc,[7][8] a deadly ground-dwelling creature. Luke retrieves his new green lightsaber from R2-D2, and the group of friends battle Jabba's thugs aboard his sail barge. During the chaos, Boba Fett falls into the Sarlacc's pit and Leia strangles Jabba to death with her chains. The group escapes as Jabba's sail barge is destroyed. </p>

<p> Filming began on January 11, 1982, and lasted through May 20, 1982, a schedule six weeks shorter than Empire. Kazanjian's schedule pushed shooting as early as possible in order to give Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) as much time as possible to work on effects, and left some crew members dubious of their ability to be fully prepared for the shoot.[58] Working on a budget of $32.5 million,[59] Lucas was determined to avoid going over budget as had happened with Empire. Kazanjian estimated that using ILM (owned wholly by Lucasfilm) for special effects saved the production approximately $18 million.[59] However, the fact that Lucasfilm was a non-union company made acquiring shooting locations more difficult and more expensive, even though Star Wars and Empire had been big hits.[33] The project was given the working title Blue Harvest with a tagline of "Horror Beyond Imagination." This disguised what the production crew was really filming from fans and the press, and also prevented price gouging by service providers.[33] </p>

<p> In April, the crew moved to Arizona's Yuma Desert for two weeks of Tatooine exteriors.[43] Production then moved to the redwood forests of northern California.[60] Forested private land near Smith River and at the Chetham Grove section of Grizzly Creek Redwoods State Park[61] were used for the forests of Endor. The crew spent two weeks shooting the Endor forest exteriors, and then concluded at ILM in San Rafael, California, for about ten days of bluescreen shots. One of two "skeletal" post-production units shooting background matte plates spent a day in Death Valley.[58] The other was a special Steadicam unit shooting forest backgrounds from June 15 to June 17, 1982, for the speeder chase near the middle of the film.[62] Steadicam inventor Garrett Brown personally filmed these shots at less than one frame per second. By walking at about 5 mph (8 km/h) and projecting the footage at 24 frame/s, the motion seen in the film appeared as if it were moving at around 120 mph (190 km/h).[33] Vader's funeral was filmed at Skywalker Ranch. </p>

<p> Meanwhile, special effects work at ILM quickly stretched the company to its operational limits. While the R&D work and experience gained from the previous two films in the trilogy allowed for increased efficiency, this was offset by the desire to have the closing film raise the bar set by each of these films.[59] A compounding factor was the intention of several departments of ILM to either take on other film work or decrease staff during slow cycles. Instead, as soon as production began, the entire company found it necessary to remain running 20 hours a day on six-day weeks in order to meet their goals by April 1, 1983. Of about 900 special effects shots,[58] all VistaVision optical effects remained in-house, since ILM was the only company capable of using the format, while about 400 4-perf opticals were subcontracted to outside effects houses.[66] Progress on the opticals was severely delayed for a time when ILM rejected about 30,000 metres (100,000 ft) of film when the film perforations failed image registration and steadiness tests.[58] </p>

<p> Return of the Jedi collected a total of $6.2 million on its opening day, beating out Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan to have the highest single day gross.[74] It would hold the record for having the highest pre-Memorial Day Wednesday gross until 1996 when Mission: Impossible surpassed it.[75] The film made $23 million from 1,002 theaters in its opening weekend and grossed a record $45.3 million in its opening week.[76] It set a new domestic opening weekend record, surpassing the $14 million opening of Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan.[77] Its $22,973 per theatre average would stand as a record for a nationwide release on an inflation-adjusted basis for 36 years until it was surpassed by Avengers: Endgame in 2019.[78] It finished first at the box office for six of its first seven weeks of release, only coming in second once behind Superman III in its fourth weekend.[5] Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 80 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.[79] When it was re-released in 1985, it made $11.2 million,[80] which totaled its initial theatrical gross to $385.8 million worldwide.[80] During its re-release in 1997, the film grossed $16.29 million in its opening weekend.[81] When it was re-released in 2023, for its 40th anniversary, the film grossed $5.1 million to place #4 in the weekend box office.[82] </p>

<p> Marvel Comics published a comic book adaptation of the film by writer Archie Goodwin and artists Al Williamson, Carlos Garzon, Tom Palmer, and Ron Frenz. The adaptation appeared in Marvel Super Special #27[123] and as a four-issue limited series.[124][125] It was later reprinted in a mass market paperback,[126] as well as collections of Marvel's self-titled Star Wars series. Marvel Super Special #27 was mistakenly released in April 1983, a month before the film itself, giving away spoilers to the film's plot. Hamill is a comic book fan and while he was in a comic book store, he discovered that the comic book was on sale there and alerted Lucasfilm. According to Carol Kalish who was Marvel's direct sales manager at the time, Marvel quickly recalled the book upon learning this mistake though it did not stop the premature revelation of the secrets of the film's plot. Kalish kept her job, as did everyone else in the Sales Department, as the incident was apparently considered a simple mistake.[127][128] </p>

<p> Kristen Lopez Culturess There are Suicide Squad-level moments of confusion, weak characters and regressive storytelling that left me downright angry. Nov 20, 2017 Full Review Candice Frederick Reel Talk Online More proof that diverse casts can actually lead to big box office numbers. Rated: 1-5 stars Apr 1, 2017 Full Review Tim Hayes Sight & Sound Apart from Ben Mendelsohn's weaselly Orson Krennic [and perhaps Donnie Yen]... the faces are unmemorable and the characters unexceptional, their meaningful glances unearned. Dec 28, 2016 Full Review Calum Cooper Movies We Texted About While I evidently find the film’s issues harder to overlook than the majority of audiences, there’s no denying the entertainment value or technical prowess on display. Rated: 3/5 Dec 4, 2024 Full Review Keith Garlington Keith & the Movies “Rogue One” looks amazing, the effects are stunning, the action is energetic, the nostalgia is delightful, there’s the right amount of humor, and it tells a good story. Rated: 4.5/5 Aug 24, 2022 Full Review Brian Eggert Deep Focus Review Diverting and well-made though the picture may be, Rogue One ultimately serves no real purpose beyond fleshing-out established material. Rated: 2.5/4 Apr 5, 2022 Full Review Read all reviews </p>

<p> Mario The best of the Disney Star Wars Era Rated 5/5 Stars • Rated 5 out of 5 stars 02/19/25 Full Review Danny Loved the actress. She and the K2SO Droid made the show! Rated 5/5 Stars • Rated 5 out of 5 stars 02/02/25 Full Review Tom Great Star Wars Movie! Loves It! Rated 5/5 Stars • Rated 5 out of 5 stars 01/13/25 Full Review Dave Good Star Wars movie. Great prequel for a new hope. Rated 3.5/5 Stars • Rated 3.5 out of 5 stars 12/08/24 Full Review Ian M The only good SW movie Disney made Rated 5/5 Stars • Rated 5 out of 5 stars 09/07/24 Full Review William D Best movie ever never gets old! Rated 5/5 Stars • Rated 5 out of 5 stars 01/24/24 Full Review Read all reviews </p>

<p> Cassian, Jyn and K-2SO arrive on Jedha where Cassian expects to meet up with a Partisan contact. The droid stays on the ship while Jyn and Cassian set out to find his contact, but the duo is caught in the middle of an armed uprising against the Empire led by Gerrera's partisans. Jyn and Cassian find safety only after K-2SO disobeys orders to stay on the U-Wing and comes to their aid. After fighting off the Imperial troopers, the convoy returns to Tythoni Square where the uprising had taken place. Imperial reinforcements arrive and K-2SO is mistaken for an actual Imperial droid transporting prisoners. The droid tries to play along, but the disguise is foiled. They are saved by the intervention of blind warrior Chirrut Îmwe and mercenary Baze Malbus, guardians of the Kyber Temple on Jedha of which the Empire is stripping of its treasures. After the Imperial reinforcements are fought off, the group thinks they are in the clear until a group of Partisans, including Benthic, arrives and takes over the square, kidnapping Andor, Erso, and the two guardians with K2 having gone back to the ship. Benthic feels that Andor was hostile towards the Partisans during the uprising because he shot one of their own who was preparing to throw a grenade at a tank next to which Jyn was hiding. Jyn reveals to the Partisans that she is the daughter of Galen Erso and the partisans take them to their headquarters in the Catacombs of Cadera and imprison them. </p>

<p> While Cassian, Chirrut, and Baze are locked in cells, Jyn is brought before Saw. The calm captive Chirrut "prays" to the Force with his mantra "I am one with the Force and the Force is with me" while Baze mocks his partner's mystical ways. Cassian becomes impatient with Chirrut and begins to try and pick the cell lock himself. Gerrera is surprised to see Jyn, having parted ways with her years before. He is still wary that the pilot's message and Jyn's return is simply a trap but when Jyn explains her intentions of finding Galen he becomes more comfortable. He questions what Jyn wants to obtain from this to which Jyn answers that she wants no part of it and that her role is finished. Refusing to believe that Jyn no longer cares about the Rebel cause, Gerrera offers to show her something that he feels will change her mind. Meanwhile, on the Death Star, Tarkin and Krennic prepare to test the weapon on Jedha City, having evacuated all Imperial forces from the moon via Protocol 13. Krennic goes to order the complete destruction of the moon, but Tarkin overrules him and orders that the test-firing be conducted at minimum power. With imminent danger approaching, unbeknownst to those on the moon, Cassian, Chirrut, and Baze linger in their cells. They notice that in the cell next to them is an Imperial pilot, Bodhi Rook, and Cassian begins to question him, curious if he is the cargo pilot that brought the message. Bor Gullet's effects on Bodhi are clear and he does not seem to understand what Cassian is talking about until he mentions Galen's name and Rook's memory is jogged. As the Death Star's superweapon commences primary ignition above the moon, Gerrera begins to show Jyn the message that Bodhi brought. The message is a hologram, in which Jyn's father expresses his love for her and discloses his coerced help on the Death Star project. Galen also reveals that he covertly compromised the Death Star's design by including a subtle vulnerability in its reactor that can be used to destroy it. He tells her that the structural plans are at an Imperial high-security data bank on the planet Scarif. However, before the hologram can finish, the Death Star fires on the moon and chaos ensues. </p>

<p> As the imminent destruction of Jedha City begins, the Partisans in the Catacombs begin to flee. Cassian quickly hot-wires the cell door and he, Chirrut, and Baze escape captivity. Cassian hurries to the convoy's possessions that were seized when the Partisans kidnapped them and frantically uses his comlink to call K-2SO who describes the destruction ensuing outside. Cassian informs him to locate their position so they can escape. Before they can flee, Cassian goes to find Jyn, telling Chirrut and Baze to flee the pilot, which Baze does by blasting the cell door with his MWC-35c "Staccato Lightning" repeating cannon. Cassian locates Jyn and informs her that Bodhi has told him where her father is. Gerrera urges her to go with Cassian, but when Jyn suggests he comes with them he refuses, electing to remain there and die with the city. The mass exodus of the catacombs begins, and those who exit look on in horror as they see Jedha's surface beginning to peel back destroy everything in its path. As the Catacombs begin to collapse along with everything else, K-2SO pilots the U-wing through the destruction to pick up the convoy. Cassian, Jyn, Chirrut, Baze, and Bodhi hurriedly board the U-wing and the ship begins its escape through the destruction. Gerrera watches from the collapsing Catacombs as the U-wing takes off and the blast wave overtakes the area. Shortly before his impending death, Gerrera tears off his breath mask and accepts his fate. Jyn watches from the U-wing as the wave consumes the Catacombs and kills Gerrera. The convoy looks on in horror at the destruction outside as K-2SO and Cassian pilot the U-wing, fleeing the destruction that threatens to overtake them. Barely escaping the blast wave, Cassian hurriedly punches in the calculations and the U-wing blasts into hyperspace, narrowly escaping Jedha. </p>

<p> As the Death Star's demonstration is carried out, Krennic, Tarkin, and many other Imperials look on. Krennic expresses the "beauty" of the destruction. With the demonstration complete, Tarkin congratulates Krennic but promptly uses Rook's defection from Galen Erso's Imperial facility on Eadu and the security leak on Jedha under Krennic's command as a pretext to take control over the project. Enraged, Krennic openly challenges Tarkin's decision and decides to deal with the defector and the potential Rebel sympathizer on Eadu personally. In the aftermath of the incident on Jedha, Cassian sends a coded message back to the Alliance base to inform them that Jedha has been destroyed and that he has learned that Galen is on Eadu. Receiving the message, General Draven is dumbfounded by the destruction of Jedha City but advises Andor to keep to the plan of killing Galen. Already in hyperspace, Cassian receives Draven's instructions and informs K-2SO to set their course for Eadu. The entire convoy is in shock concerning Jedha's destruction, and a troubled Chirrut begs Baze to describe the extent of the destruction. Baze reluctantly consents. Knowing now that her father is on Eadu, Jyn explains to Bodhi — who mistakenly believes that his message was too late — that Galen has laid a trap in the Death Star. However, with the message having been destroyed in the chaos on Jedha, she has no way of backing up her claims and the group is wary to believe her. With Cassian refusing to send word of Jyn's claim to the Alliance, she resolves to get her father on Eadu and bring him back to the Alliance so that he can tell them himself. </p>

<p> With Galen Erso silenced, Krennic travels to Mustafar to speak with the mysterious Dark Lord, Darth Vader at his castle. Upon Krennic's arrival, the Dark Lord's servant, Vaneé alerts Vader, who is meditating in a rejuvenation chamber that the Director has arrived. Vader exits his meditation to confront Krennic on a platform overlooking the volcanic landscape of the planet. The Dark Lord expresses his concern that the Death Star has become more of a problem than the solution it was intended to be, citing Krennic's inability to keep the project a secret as the main catalyst for the change in approach. Krennic defends himself and his creation, claiming that he has delivered a remarkable weapon to the Emperor. Because of his self proclaimed success, he petitions that Vader grant him an opportunity to personally meet with the Emperor and advise him of the Death Star's unprecedented potential. Vader, however, is far more concerned about the rumors that had reached the higher levels of the Empire of the destruction of Jedha City and the attack on the Eadu facility by the Rebellion and what these revelations mean as far as the secrecy surrounding the Death Star project. Krennic attempted to shift blame onto Tarkin for ordering the demonstration on Jedha in the first place, but Vader is not impressed by this futile effort and criticizes Krennic's groveling, reminding the Director that the secrecy behind the Death Star project was instituted in order to prevent open defiance from the Senate. Vader suggests that the Jedha incident be disguised as a mining disaster, but seems to imply that Galen Erso's betrayal might have been a bitter blow to the Empire's secrecy. Vader instructs Krennic to ensure that no other leaks occur so that the Emperor would be satisfied that the project had not been compromised. As Vader swiftly departs, Krennic makes a last plea for his continued control over the project, hoping to remain in command of the battle station rather than Tarkin. However, Vader's patience has run thin, and when Krennic requests that Vader speak to the Emperor on his behalf, the Dark Lord chokes the Director using the Force. As Krennic falls to his knees, Vader warns him to temper his aspirations, lest they cause his downfall. He releases Krennic and the conversation is ended. </p>

<p> Having returned to the Rebel base on Yavin 4, Jyn and Bodhi are both present at an Alliance Council meeting where Jyn proposes for the rebels to travel to Scarif and steal the Death Star schematics so they will know where to target the flawed reactor module. The Rebel leadership — including Mon Mothma, Jan Dodonna, Bail Organa, Tynnra Pamlo, Nower Jebel, Vasp Vaspar, Davits Draven, Admiral Raddus, and Antoc Merrick — cannot come to a consensus; many of the Senators propose to scatter their fleet because they have no choice but to surrender. Mothma, Organa, and Raddus attempt to defend Jyn's plan. Unfortunately for them, with Galen Erso and Saw Gerrera dead, and their hologram destroyed, the Rebel leadership has no way of verifying Jyn's claims. The fearful opposition of Pamlo, Vaspar, and Jebel outweighs the support, despite an impassioned plea from Jyn, calling for hope. Without the full support of the council, Mothma is forced to play the devil's advocate, declaring the odds too great to commit so much of their forces. </p>

<p> Rebel troops land from the gunship to reinforce Rogue One. The fleet begins to attack the Shield Gate but to no avail. Rebel X-wings engage numerous TIE fighters stationed on the Shield Gate, with both sides suffering substantial casualties. Jyn finds the plans on the Citadel mainframe — codenamed Stardust, in which Jyn immediately recognizes the name as a secret personal message from her father to help her find the Death Star plans. K-2SO closes the vault door moments before stormtroopers arrive to investigate. K-2SO desperately attempts to lure them away, but the stormtroopers become suspicious and he is forced to attack them. Before being destroyed by enemy fire, K-2SO locks the vault door so the stormtroopers could not open it again, allowing time for his comrades to retrieve the plans. Krennic is informed that the vault has had unauthorized access and goes to investigate. Jyn and Cassian climb the data vault and physically remove the data plans. Right after the retrieval of the plans, however, the duo are ambushed by Krennic. He shoots Cassian with his blaster, causing him to fall. </p>

<p> John Knoll, a visual effects supervisor and the chief creative officer at ILM, began developing the idea for Rogue One in the mid-2000s, after learning that George Lucas was developing a Star Wars live-action TV series. However, Knoll put aside the idea once he realized that it would not fit within the show's concept.[10][11] The series was eventually put on indefinite hold due to budget constraints,[12] and Lucas decided to retire from filmmaking,[13] hiring Kathleen Kennedy as the new head of Lucasfilm.[14] According to Kennedy, Lucas was "really interested in exploring all the stories that existed inside the universe."[9] (Lucas had long considered making films outside of the saga, dating back to development of the original Star Wars film.[15]) Lucasfilm settled on calling these non-episodic adventures the Star Wars Anthology Series.[9] At the urging of his colleagues,[10] Knoll pitched his idea to various people within Lucasfilm, including Lucasfilm Story Group member Pablo Hidalgo, who was enthusiastic about the idea. This led to a meeting with Kennedy and Kiri Hart, a member of the Story Group and Lucasfilm's vice president of development. Kennedy, who said she was president "for about 10 minutes" when she had the discussion with Knoll, thought it was a great idea and that "there was no way" she could say no to the idea. Like Kennedy, Hart was "immediately excited about" the film.[9] It was then chosen as the first stand-alone film to be produced, due to the involvement of plot elements that general audiences would be familiar with.[16] </p>

<p> Gary Whitta, who had written The Book of Eli and After Earth, was hired to write the film's screenplay.[3] The main characters did not die in the original script, due to the filmmakers' assumption that Disney would want to use the characters again.[18] Whitta's script also ended with a wedding.[19] On March 12, 2015, it was announced that Chris Weitz would take over screenwriting duties from Whitta.[20] (Reportedly, Scott Z. Burns and Christopher McQuarrie also wrote drafts of the script.[21][22][23][17]) It was further announced that the film would be titled Rogue One[20]—a name coined by Whitta during the writing process[24]—and that Felicity Jones, who had been nominated for an Academy Award for her performance in The Theory of Everything, had been cast in the film.[20] In Weitz's draft, it was not made clear that the Empire was building the Death Star: "It was just the sense that the rebellion — that something bad was going down and we need to find out about it. There was this developing sense of dread throughout the film."[19] </p>

<p> The film began principal photography in London in August 2015. This was announced during the D23 Expo that same month. Additionally, a StarWars.com blog post revealed the full cast for the film.[30] At least two of the cast underwent special training for their roles: Felicity Jones in a style of martial arts and Diego Luna in military training.[7][31] Members of the British Armed Forces were also hired as extras.[32] The production team worked to create a film that felt real, as if it was taking place in a real location; and one that was set within the gray areas of Star Wars, as opposed to the clear morality of the original Star Wars trilogy.[9] The look of the film was inspired by the work of artist Frederic Remington,[33] as well as footage of real-life wars.[34] Warwick Davis, who had a small role in the film, described Edwards' directing style: "He would shoot in a very unique way where stuff was kind of almost improvised, but you never knew quite when he was shooting and when he wasn't, so you just kept doing stuff just in case he was rolling at that time."[35] </p>

<p> A brief teaser trailer was shown for Celebration Anaheim attendees, depicting the Death Star far off in the distance on a jungle world.[9] Lucasfilm was not able to promote the film anywhere outside of Celebration Anaheim, however, during the summer of 2015, due to the similarities between the titles of Rogue One and the then-upcoming film Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation. The title of Rogue Nation was registered with the Motion Picture Association of America prior to Rogue One, leading to the embargo on Rogue One promotion.[46] On April 7, 2016, a teaser trailer debuted during ABC's Good Morning America. A ten-second preview of the teaser had been released online the day before.[47] On July 15, there was a Rogue One panel at Celebration Europe featuring Gareth Edwards and Kathleen Kennedy;[48] During the panel, a featurette and a new trailer were released; The featurette aired that night during the ABC broadcast of Secrets of the Force Awakens: A Cinematic Journey.[49] A trailer aired during the 2016 Summer Olympics.[50] </p>

<p> In August 2016, Lucasfilm released a series of online images advertising Hasbro's Rogue One toy line, which debuted on September 30.[82] The toys were also featured in Go Rogue, an officially sponsored, fan-created online video series that continued throughout September.[83][84] The Black Series figure of Jyn Erso was released on October 15, 2016. By September 4, 2016, the figure had already skyrocketed to become the #1 Best Seller in Amazon's Action & Toy Figures category, based on hourly-updated figures.[85][86] Verizon sponsored Rogue One: Recon, a 3D experience created by ILM Experience Lab.[87] Nissan offered a Rogue One–themed Limited Edition of its 2017 Nissan Rogue.[88] In October 2016, Rogue One–inspired commercials aired for Duracell, Nissan and Gilette products.[89][90][91] </p>

<p> Rogue One became available on Digital HD on March 24, 2017, and on Blu-ray and DVD on April 4, 2017. The retail version contains bonuses exclusive to the store outlet where it was purchased. Target's 5-disc set includes collectible packaging with interchangeable character covers and exclusive bonus content (Blu-ray 3D + two Blu-ray + DVD + DVD exclusive content – 2 additional bonus features + Digital HD + collectible packaging), Best Buy has a 4-disc set with exclusive SteelBook packaging (Blu-ray 3D + two Blu-ray + DVD + Digital HD + SteelBook packaging), and Wal-Mart sells a 3-disc set with exclusive K-2SO packaging and two Galactic Connexions trading discs (two Blu-ray + DVD + Digital HD + K-2SO packaging + two Galactic Connexions trading discs). In addition to the film itself, the various home-media releases include various special content, including John Knoll's inspiration for the concept of the film, coverage of the cast regarding their respective characters, coverage of easter eggs hidden throughout the film, and behind-the-scenes looks at how Tarkin and Leia were given digital touchups.[92] </p>

<p> Rogue One is set between the films Star Wars: Episode III Revenge of the Sith and Star Wars: Episode IV A New Hope, during the Age of the Empire. The film revolves around a group of resistance fighters who unite to steal the plans to the Death Star, the Galactic Empire's deep space mobile battle station that is capable of destroying entire planets.[9] The theft of the plans was first referenced in the opening crawl of A New Hope, which described the event as the Rebel Alliance's "first victory against the evil Galactic Empire." The crawl further states that "Rebel spies managed to steal secret plans to ... the DEATH STAR". The opening scenes of A New Hope deal with that battle's aftermath, with Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan fleeing from the Empire with the plans in order to deliver them to the Rebel Alliance. The Death Star is ultimately destroyed in A New Hope after the princess and her companions—Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Chewbacca, and the droids R2-D2 and C-3PO—deliver the plans to the Rebellion and a weakness in the station is discovered.[101] </p>

<p> The Alliance learn of the raid from intercepted Imperial communications and deploys their fleet in support, leading to a space battle against the Imperial fleet. A "Blue" squadron of X-wings managed through Scarif's surface to assist Rogue One. K-2SO sacrifices himself so Jyn and Cassian can retrieve the data. Chirrut is killed after activating the switch to allow communication with the Rebel fleet, and Baze is killed shortly afterward. Bodhi is killed by a grenade after informing the Rebel fleet that it must deactivate the planetary shield to allow the transmission of the plans. Admiral Raddus uses a Rebel ship to crash two Imperial Star Destroyers into each other; the wreckage destroys the shield generator. Jyn obtains the schematics but is ambushed by Krennic, who is shot and wounded by Cassian. The unappreciated Krennic allows them to processed. Jyn transmits the schematics to the Rebel command ship moments before the Death Star appears above Scarif, commanded by Tarkin. He orders the Death Star to destroy the citadel, killing everyone, including Krennic, Cassian, and Jyn. </p>

<p> Meanwhile, in the base, Cassian, Jyn, and K-2SO made it to the data vault, and Jyn and Cassian went to search for the Death Star plans while K-2SO guarded the entrance and searched the database. They found the plans under the name "Stardust," but K-2SO was overwhelmed by troopers and destroyed the console, to protect his friends before permanently shutting down. Jyn and Cassian climbed the archives and retrieved the data file, but Cassian was injured by Krennic and fell, leaving Jyn to climb to the satellite dish alone. After Jyn reset the dish, Krennic tried to stop her from transmitting the plans, but he was shot by an injured Cassian, who had followed him up. Jyn transmitted the plans to the Alliance, who had, by this time, destroyed the planetary shield with the help of two Imperial I-class Star Destroyers and a Sphyrna-class Hammerhead corvette named the Lightmaker, piloted by Captain Kado Oquoné of the Rebel Alliance. Jyn and Cassian made their way to the shore, where they saw the blast from the Death Star. Confident that the Rebels received the plans, the two embraced as the explosion consumed them, and the rest of the base. No members of Rogue One survived the blast.[2] </p>

<p> Jyn, along with Rebel officer Cassian Andor and his reprogrammed Imperial droid, K-2SO, arrive on the moon Jedha where there is an armed uprising against the Empire. With the aid of blind warrior Chirrut Îmwe and mercenary Baze Malbus, Jyn reunites with her old revolutionary mentor Saw Gerrera, who has captured Rook. He shows her the hologram, in which her father expresses his love for her and discloses his coerced help on the project. The hologram also reveals that her father covertly compromised the Death Star's design by including a subtle vulnerability in its reactor that can be used to destroy it. He tells her that the structural plans are at an Imperial high-security data bank on the planet Scarif. Meanwhile, Imperial Governor Grand Moff Tarkin meets with Krennic on the Death Star and expresses skepticism about the project and its management. As a demonstration, Krennic uses the weapon to destroy Jedha's capital and crush the insurgency led by Gerrera, forcing Jyn and her group to flee with Rook, but Gerrera chooses to remain behind and is killed in the explosion. Tarkin congratulates Krennic, but then uses Rook's defection as a pretext to take over control of the project, infuriating Krennic. </p>

<p> Jyn proposes a plan to steal the Death Star schematics from Scarif, but with her father and Gerrera dead and the hologram destroyed, the Rebel leadership have no way of verifying her story and cannot agree on a plan. Frustrated at their inaction, Jyn, Cassian, K-2SO, and a number of rebels take the shuttle to raid the data bank themselves. As the three search the data bank for the design plans, the rest of their team set off explosives and commence firing in the nearby landing area in order to distract the resident stormtroopers. The rebel fleet learns about the invasion from intercepted imperial communications and deploys in support off-planet. Krennic arrives, aiming to review all of Galen's communications to discover what information he had been sending out. Jyn obtains the schematics from the data vaults while K-2SO is destroyed fending off stormtroopers. Krennic ambushes Jyn and Cassian at the vault, and shoots Cassian down before pursuing Jyn to the roof. </p>

<p> Meanwhile, Imwe is killed after activating the master switch to allow communication to the rebel fleet. After informing the rebel fleet that it must take down the planetary shields to allow Jyn to transmit them the schematics, a stormtrooper hurls a grenade into the shuttle; the resulting explosion kills Rook and destroys the shuttle. Malbus dies in battle shortly after. On the roof, Krennic corners Jyn and declares the empire's victory, but Cassian, who has survived, shoots and badly wounds Krennic. Jyn then transmits the plans to the rebel command ship. The Death Star arrives in orbit, where Tarkin uses the laser to destroy the base. Krennic dies instantly, while Jyn and Cassian embrace on a beach before dying in the ensuing shockwave. An Imperial force led by Darth Vader intercepts and boards the command ship. Vader massacres the rebel troops in pursuit of the plans, only to watch as a blockade runner escapes with them. On board, Princess Leia acknowledges the stolen plans will provide the Rebellion a much needed hope for its future. </p>

<p> In 2003, during the production of Episode III in Sydney, John Knoll, the visual effects supervisor for all three prequels, pitched an episode for the unproduced series Star Wars: Underworld.[48] At the time, he had written a short treatment called "Destroyer of Worlds".[49] After the Disney acquisition he felt as though he had to pitch it again or forever wonder "what might've happened if I had."[50][51] In May 2014, Disney announced that Gareth Edwards would direct the film and that Gary Whitta would write the script.[52] In October of the same year, cinematographer Greig Fraser revealed that he was hired to work on the film.[53] In January 2015, it was revealed that Whitta had completed his work on the script, and would no longer be involved with the project.[54] Simon Kinberg was considered as a replacement.[55] Later that month, it was announced Chris Weitz had signed to continue the script's development for the film.[56] In March 2015, the title Rogue One was officially revealed.[57][c] </p>

<p> Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) produced the film's visual effects. ILM used CGI and digitally altered archive footage to insert Peter Cushing's likeness over the body of actor Guy Henry.[113] Lucasfilm secured permission from the late actor's estate to include him in the film.[114] The team searched through archival footage of Cushing footage in order to find suitable reference material,[115] and Henry provided the motion capture and voice work. A digital model of Cushing was mapped over Henry's performance like a digital body mask. Cushing's mannerisms, including his manner of speaking, were studied by the creative team and applied to the digital Tarkin model.[116] Cushing's estate was heavily involved with the creation and had input right down to "small, subtle adjustments."[117][118][114] A similar process was used in the portrayal of Princess Leia; Carrie Fisher's appearance as Leia in the first film was superimposed over the face of Norwegian actress Ingvild Deila and archival audio of Fisher saying "hope" was used to voice the character.[28][29][119] </p>

<p> In March 2015, it was reported that Alexandre Desplat who had worked with Edwards on Godzilla (2014), would compose the score for Rogue One,[122] and had confirmed it in an April 2016 interview.[123] As the film's reshooting affected the post-production process, Desplat opted out from the project due to his commitments for scoring Valerian and the City of a Thousand Planets (2017), and was replaced by Michael Giacchino in September 2016.[124] Giacchino only had four and a half weeks to compose the music for the film, beginning almost immediately after finishing scoring Doctor Strange.[121] In addition to composing original themes, Giacchino incorporated some of John Williams' themes from previous films into the score.[121] The official soundtrack was released by Walt Disney Records on December 16, 2016.[125] An extended version of the soundtrack was released on February 11, 2022, which includes additional demos composed for the film score, and cues that were not included in the album, or being un-edited.[126] A vinyl edition was further released by Mondo in March 2022.[127][128] </p>

<p> A teaser trailer for Rogue One, released by Lucasfilm on April 7, 2016,[130] was praised by reviewers for its portrayal of strong female characters.[131] The Daily Telegraph described Jyn Erso's character as "a roguish, Han Solo-style heroine," calling the film "progressive," while noting its painstaking faithfulness to the production design style of the original Star Wars trilogy.[132] The Hollywood Reporter also noted the visual nods to the original trilogy, and examined the film's possible narrative direction, considering that the outcome is to some extent already revealed in the opening crawl of A New Hope.[133] The Atlantic writer David Sims stated that the trailer brought "back some memorable pieces of architecture, from the lumbering AT-AT walkers to the Death Star itself, not to mention the glorious 70s costuming of Star Wars." He added that the trailer has "the look," blending the old with the new.[134] The trailer was viewed close to 30 million times in its first 29 hours, at a rate of 800,000 views per hour, from Facebook and YouTube, which is 200,000 views short of what the first teaser trailer for Star Wars: The Force Awakens was receiving in November 2014.[135] </p>

<p> In June 2016, Rogue One was promoted at the Star Wars Celebration Europe III event in London.[136] During the event, a new official poster was unveiled, which depicts a battle taking place on the tropical planet Scarif, with the Death Star looming large in a blue sky, above which is printed the tagline "A Rebellion Built on Hope". A second teaser trailer was screened exclusively at the event, and it was reviewed favorably by critics; The Daily Telegraph noted that the trailer revealed new locations such as the planets Jedha and Scarif, and that its most significant revelation came in the final seconds of the teaser, with the appearance of Darth Vader, reflected in a computer screen and accompanied by his classic breathing sound effect.[101] Variety also hailed the Vader reveal, and noted that the emphasis of the production was much more on the kinetic depiction of large battle sequences and full-on warfare, comparing it to Francis Ford Coppola's 1979 Vietnam War epic Apocalypse Now. A showreel was also shown during the event, which featured footage from the film, cut with behind-the-scenes shots and interviews with the director and cast members.[137] The second trailer was shown publicly during a broadcast of the 2016 Summer Olympics and received positive responses; Wired stated that the trailer was "littered with nostalgic throwbacks to the original trilogy," while Rolling Stone described the CGI landscape shots seen in the footage as "eye-poppingly gorgeous."[138][139] </p>

<p> In the United States, the film made $29 million from its Thursday night previews, making it the highest-grossing Thursday opening of 2016. On Friday, the film grossed $71.1 million, and $46.3 million the next day, securing a total of $155.1 million in its opening weekend, the third-biggest debut of 2016.[171] It topped the box office once again in its second weekend, grossing $64 million (down 58.7%) over the three day weekend, and $96.1 million over the four day weekend. On Christmas Day, it grossed $25.9 million.[172] It finished first at the box office again in its third weekend, grossing $49.6 million (−22.5%) over the three-day weekend and $65.5 million over the four-day weekend.[173] In its fourth weekend, Sunday projections had the film grossing $22 million, besting newcomer Hidden Figures' $21.8 million. However, final figures the following day revealed the film tallied a weekend total of $21.9 million, falling to second place behind Hidden Figures' $22.8 million.[174] The IMAX re-release of the film on August 26, 2022, made $1.1 million over the weekend, bringing its running IMAX total to $105 million, 10th all-time.[175] </p>

<p> IGN reviewer Eric Goldman gave the film 9 out of 10, describing Rogue One's storytelling being related to the plot of Star Wars (1977) as a "tricky gambit", but praised it for being clear and connected. He also enjoyed the visual aesthetic, which he opined helped establish its own identity, and praised the performances of Jones, Luna, and Tudyk. He disliked the film's connection to other Star Wars films, disliking the use of digital effects to recreate a character from the original trilogy, deeming it as "uncanny valley."[179] Peter Travers of Rolling Stone affirmed the film as being reminiscent of the original trilogy, and enjoyed Edward's direction and the pacing. He especially enjoyed Jones' performance and the action sequences in the third act, although he felt the film's exposition slightly undermined character interactions. Travers went on to give the film 4 stars.[180] /Film rated Rogue One an 8 out of 10, with writer Peter Sciretta enjoying the darker tone, action sequences, Giacchino's score, and felt it retroactively improved Star Wars by providing additional context and backstory. Sciretta wished the film focused on further characterization, which he felt was neglected due to the ensemble cast and runtime.[181] </p>

<p> Justin Chang, writing for the Los Angeles Times, praised Fraser's cinematography and also enjoyed the action sequences, feeling its storytelling would "immediately ascend to classic status" and justified its existence. He particularly emphasized the cast, and commended the performances of Yen, Luna, and Jones; he defended the ensemble cast from criticism by contending it highlighted the film's anti-fascist themes. Chang also speculated that the film had faster pacing due to wanting to avoid criticisms of slow pacing from the prequel trilogy.[182] Peter Bradshaw, a film critic of The Guardian giving a 4 star rating, enjoyed the film for providing "muscular and adroit "variations on familiar Star Wars elements and themes in addition to the depiction of the Death Star. He also offered general praise for cast performances, including that of Mikkelsen, Mendelsohn, Jones, Tudyk, Yen, and Luna, but felt the film did not "go rogue at any stage" and considered it to be released during the cultural zeitgeist of Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015).[183] In another 4 star review for The Guardian, Mark Kermode further praised the cast, enjoying the diversity and positively compared Jyn's character to that of Ellen Ripley from the film Aliens (1986). He also praised the cinematography of the battle scenes, which he described as being evocative of the Normandy landings and Vietnam War, and felt the standalone nature of the film allowed it to raise the dramatic stakes during the third act.[184] </p>

<p> In a more critical review, The Washington Post's Ann Hornaday regarded the film as being simplistic and a "placeholder", comparing its imagery to Mad Max: Fury Road (2015) and Arrival (2016). She positively regarded the visual aesthetic, Giacchino's score, and darker tone, but thought the plot was unoriginal and lacked the tone of previous Star Wars films. That said, she regarded the film as superior to the prequel trilogy.[185] Similarly, giving a C+ grade, IndieWire's David Ehrlich similarly regarded it as "a spirited but agonizingly safe attempt to ... to keep the wheels greased between proper installments". He lauded the opening scene and final act, saying the latter reminded him of Star Wars "as we remembered it", and praised the set design and visuals as "gorgeous." He also enjoyed how the film reconciled narrative elements between the original and newer Star Wars films, but felt the lack of interesting character development and requirement to adhere to pre-existing narratives was to its detriment.[186] A. O. Scott and Richard Brody, writing for The New York Times and The New Yorker respectively, more heavily scrutinized the film and gave negative reviews. Both felt that it did not expand upon the Star Wars mythos, criticized the script, and considered the film to ultimately not justify its existence.[187][188] Scott regarded the film as being "mediocre" and primarily critiqued the plot and thematic content, which he believed to be underdeveloped.[187] Meanwhile, Brody, who went on to call it "lobotomized and depersonalized," felt Edwards overlooked many aspects of Star Wars lore. Brody positively regarded Fraser's cinematography, and considered it his favorite element of the film, but was not affected by the death of major characters as he was not emotionally invested in their story.[188] </p>

<p> James Seddon, writer for the military news website Task & Purpose lauded Rogue One as the Star Wars film that best reflects real military experience. Many details, resonate with his own military service and seem real to veterans: "The spacecraft rattle annoyingly. Places where hands would naturally grab, or gear would rub, have the paint worn off. Cockpit windows are scratched, and, if the sunlight hits them wrong, they are hard to see through. Headphones get hung on a convenient grab rail and not on the hanger designed for them—if there even was a hanger. Apparently, designers of military vehicles in galaxies far, far, away have also never actually operated them in the field." He also pointed to aspects beyond the film's production design, like Rebel Lt. Sefla's muzzle discipline, the "bitter stoicism" predominant among characters who "spend most of their time wet, uncomfortable, afraid, and bickering" even as they work diligently to complete their mission, and the moral ambiguity of some of the Rebels' actions.[194] </p>

<p> Some journalists also criticized the quality of the CGI that was used to represent a younger Carrie Fisher in order to portray Princess Leia at an earlier time, as well as its suitability in movie-making.[28][29] Eliana Dockterman of Time wrote that "there was something particularly plastic about this version of the young Carrie Fisher—so smooth and so perfect it couldn't be real—that pulled me out of the moment."[199] Kelly Lawler of USA Today said that "while Tarkin is merely unnerving, the Leia cameo is so jarring as to take the audience completely out of the film at its most emotional moment. Leia's appearance was meant to help the film end on a hopeful note (quite literally, as 'hope' is her line), but instead it ends on a weird and unsettling one."[200] Michael Cavna of The Washington Post described the facial effect as feeling "distractingly artificial and nearly alien, like a plastered death mask robbed of authentic actorly effect, well beyond the usual artifice of Botox."[201] For her part, Fisher was shown the CGI rendition of her younger self for the film by Kathleen Kennedy and "loved it."[202] </p>

<p> James Dyer of Empire Magazine gave the film 4 stars, saying "The ultimate Star Wars fan film, it's short on whimsy but when it gets going there's enough risk-taking and spectacle to bode well for future standalones".[4] Amy Nicholson of MTV gave the film a C-, saying "Audiences once packed theaters to gawk at the future; now, it's to soak in the past. The emphasis is on packing in as much nostalgia as possible and tersely editing it together to resemble a film".[5] IGN's Eric Goldman gave the film a 9/10, stating "The film offers a remarkable recreation of the original Star Wars' world, while exploring this universe from a different, edgier perspective than is the norm".[6] Matthew Pejkovic of Matt's Movie Reviews scored the film a 4/5, saying "Earns its intergalactic stripes as a Star Wars spin-off of visual gumption and gritty action filmmaking, securing its place as the glue between trilogies in this ever expanding space saga".[7] Mark Dujsik of Mark Reviews Movies gave the film a 2/4, stating "We're used to the characters in this series existing primarily as archetypes. The characters here, though, barely qualify as archetypes".[8] </p>

<p> Jyn Erso: Lucasfilm president and Rogue One producer Kathleen Kennedy describes Jyn (Felicity Jones) as having "a checkered past," and that she's been detained by the rebellion. "She is being given an opportunity to be useful. And by being useful, it may commute her sentence. . .she’s a real survivor. She becomes a kind of Joan of Arc in the story." Captain Cassian Andor: Played by Diego Luna, Captain Andor will be a tough Rebel intelligence officer with no patience for rule breaking. "He conveys a fair amount of experience and the reality of what it’s like to do this every day, to try to figure out how to resist the Empire effectively and intelligently,” Kiri Hart, Lucasfilm’s chief of story development, revealed. “It’s not easy." Chirrut Imwe: Donnie Yen will step into the shoes of blind warrior monk Chirrut, who hopes to continue the Jedi message without actually being one. "This idea that magical beings are going to come and save us is going away, and it’s up to normal, everyday people to take a stand to stop evil from dominating the world," said director Gareth Edwards. Baze Malbus: "He understands Chirrut’s spiritual centeredness, but he doesn’t necessarily support it,” Kennedy said of Baze (Jiang Wen), who is close with Chirrut, but doesn't share his ideals. K-2SO: Ready for some competition, BB-8? Alan Tudyk will voice the large, confident security droid, who Edwards says is "the antithesis of C-3PO," and that he's "a little bit like Chewbacca's personality in a droid’s body." Galen Erso: Mads Mikkelsen had previously dropped a few hints about his character, and now we have confirmation. Not only is Galen Jyn's estranged father, but he's also a scientist wanted by both the Empire and the Rebellion thanks to highly sensitive knowledge he has that could potentially destroy the world. "He’s one of those people that has insight into you know specific aspects of just how the universe works," Hart told the magazine. Director Orson Krennic: Ben Mendelsohn is the film's primary baddie, with an army of Deathtroopers at his disposal to help squash the Rebellion. "The bad guy is a lot more terrifying when he’s really smart, and really effective,” says John Knoll, who worked on the story for Rogue One. “There is a lot of palace intrigue going on in the Empire, with people conspiring to move up the ranks and sabotaging each other. There’s not a lot of loyalty there." </p>

<p> When Obi-Wan met the burly, unshaven, and mean-looking Fett and his son Boba (Daniel Logan) who looked eerily similar to the young boy clones, he became suspicious when Fett mentioned that he did not know Master Sifo-Dyas. (He also sensed that Fett was the armored "rocket man" who had zoomed away after firing the deadly dart.) Fett said that he had been recruited by a man named Tyranus on one of the moons of Bogden. Before Obi-Wan departed from Kamino, he sent a hologram message via his astro-droid robot R4-P17 to Mace Windu and Yoda. He reported on the "clone army," and his suspicion that bounty hunter Fett was the master assassin. When Obi-Wan described Master Sifo-Dyas' order for the army (at the request of the Senate almost 10 years earlier), he was told that the order was never authorized by the Jedi Council. There must be an imposter and someone wished war. Yoda was amazed: "Blind we are if creation of this clone army we could not see." The ability to use the Force appeared to be diminishing. </p>

<p> They spent more and more time together, and became attached to each other. He confessed about how he was "in agony" and suffering from inner conflicts now that he was so close to her: "The closer I get to you, the worse it gets. The thought of not being with you - I can't breathe. I'm haunted by the kiss that you should never have given me...You are in my very soul, tormenting me. What can I do?" More grounded in the real world although aware of their mutual attraction, she knew that their two life's paths were going in divergent directions - as a Senator and a Jedi, and they couldn't live a lie and remain secretly in love. He reluctantly agreed: "You're right. It would destroy us." Anakin began to suffer recurring nightmares of harm and pain coming to his mother Schmi Skywalker (Pernilla August), who he had left behind on Tatooine as a slave when he departed to train as a Jedi. He disobeyed Obi-Wan's mandate of protecting the Senator, and vowed to return to his home desert planet of Tatooine to aid his endangered mother. Padmé agreed to go with him, so he wouldn't technically be disobeying his orders. </p>

<p> At the Kamino landing area in Tipoca City where a rainstorm was brewing and waves lashed against the stilts of the platform, Obi-Wan confronted Jango and Boba Fett preparing to make a hurried departure. While young Boba was in the cockpit of their ship, Jango (armored with a rocket pack on his back) fired his gun blaster while Obi-Wan defended himself with his lightsaber, and the two wrestled, grappled and fought one-on-one against each other. Jango also fired a thin wire from his wrist pack and tried to entangle the Jedi and drag him off. When Obi-Wan plummeted over the edge of the platform and toward the raging ocean waters below, Jango thought his opponent was dead, although Obi-Wan saved himself with his Jedi powers. He was able to return to the platform as Fett's ship Slave I was lifting off and roaring away. Without being noticed, Obi-Wan attached a homing beacon device to the hull of their craft. </p>

<p> Once Anakin and Padmé (with R2-D2) arrived at Tatooine, he contacted former slave owner Watto (Andrew Secombe) to locate his mother Schmi. She had been sold to moisture farmer Cliegg Lars (Jack Thompson), who freed her and married her. The two traveled to the Lars moisture farm homestead on the desert floor on the other side of Mos Eisley, where they were first greeted by half-finished droid C-3PO (Anthony Daniels). In a courtyard, they were also introduced to Anakin's step-brother Owen Lars (Joel Edgerton) and his girlfriend Beru Whitesun (Bonnie Piesse). Cliegg Lars appeared injured (he'd lost a leg) and in a wheelchair, and explained how a Tusken Raider hunting party (of "vicious mindless monsters") attacked at dawn about a month earlier, and kidnapped Schmi. Determined to find his mother, Anakin left immediately on Owen's speeder bike, arrived at the Tusken encampment at night, and discovered his dying mother in one of the huts. With bloody wounds on her face, she was also tied up to a wooden frame. He released her, but she died moments later in his arms after telling him: "Now I am complete." </p>

<p> Meanwhile, Obi-Wan trailed the Fetts' ship to the red planet of Geonosis, which was surrounded by an asteroid field that formed an encircling ring. When Fett realized they were being tracked, both vessels dove into the asteroid belt. They tried to lose Obi-Wan by releasing seismic charges at his fighter and firing missiles at him, while maneuvering with power-climbing, flipping, rolling, and turning at fast speeds through huge floating asteroids. To evade one lethal missile, Obi-Wan jettisoned spare part canisters into the path of the missile and it exploded. Believing that Obi-Wan had been blown up, the Fetts continued on to land on Geonosis. After hiding awhile on one of the chunks of rock, Obi-Wan followed and as he navigated over the planet's surface, he noticed an "unusual concentration of Federation ships." He entered one of the towers, and in the underground facility (or foundry) saw hundreds of Battle droids ("the finest army in the galaxy") being manufactured on an assembly line in preparation for war. </p>

<p> In the Supreme Chancellor's office in Coruscant, the Jedi Council and Palpatine were worried about Obi-Wan's discoveries. Senator Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits) argued against Senator Ask Aak (Steven Boyle), asserting that the debate over the military act was still occurring, and that they couldn't call up the clone army yet: "The Senate will never approve the use of clones before the Separatists attack." Another Senator, Mas Amedda (David Bowers), suggested a radical measure during the crisis - to have the Senate vote to give the Chancellor emergency powers so he could approve the use of the recently-discovered clone army. During a session of the Senate, replacement "Senator" Binks called for such a vote, and Supreme Chancellor Palpatine was granted "emergency powers." His first act was to organize the Clone Army and send it into battle - to "create a grand army of the Republic to counter the increasing threats of the Separatists." Worried by the recent turn of events, Jedi Mace Windu decided to lead a team of Jedi to Geonosis to help Obi-Wan (not knowing that Padmé and Anakin were also on their way there), while Yoda planned to view the Clone Army created on the planet of Kamino for the Republic. </p>

<p> Anakin and Padmé landed in one of planet Geonosis' exhaust vents, and walked down a corridor where they were attacked by winged alien Geonosian creatures. Although Anakin defended them with his lightsaber and the powers of the Force, they were dropped onto a moving assembly line with mechanical robotic arms and stampers ("Machines making machines," C-3PO derided), and buckets holding molten steel. Both Padmé and Anakin dodged numerous deadly pieces of equipment, until they were captured by armored Jango Fett. Held in a dark tunnel near an Execution Arena and expecting to die soon, Padmé unexpectedly declared her feelings of love for Anakin ("I truly deeply love you and before we die, I want you to know"). The two were brought into the arena in a cart, where they were chained to two pillars. Obi-Wan was also handcuffed with his arms pulled above his head at a third pillar. The stadium stands were filled with cheering alien Geonosians, while dignitaries (including Count Dooku, Nute Gunray, the Fetts, Archduke Poggle the Lesser, and others) took their places high up in the Archduke's box. </p>

<p> The prisoners were to battle three savage beast adversaries: a gigantic bull-like, horned Reek, a dino-lobster Acklay, and a lion and rat-like Nexu. Picadors with long spears who were riding on large Orrays poked the monsters toward the center of the arena, to devour the captives. The Nexu attacked Padmé (who had released her chains and climbed to the top of her pillar), while Anakin rode the back of the Reek with his chains used as reins around its horns, and Obi-Wan speared the Acklay. Anakin came to their rescue as they all hopped on the Reek, but they found themselves surrounded by rolling Destroyer droids ("droidekas"). To aid their survival and escape, Mace Windu approached the Archduke's box from behind, drew his lightsaber, and announced: "This party's over." He had stationed his team of Jedi Knights around the entire stadium. The battle began throughout the arena between the Jedi forces (including the three freed captives now equipped with lightsabers) and Dooku's Battle droid army with ray guns who were swarming over the arena floor. An armored and jet-packed Jango Fett and Mace Windu struggled one-on-one briefly, until Windu sliced Jett's helmeted-head off with his lightsaber. </p>

<p> The tide turned against the few dozen-remaining Jedi forces, when they became surrounded and slain by hordes of superdroids and other battle droids. They were on the verge of defeat when Master Yoda flew in with gunships, containing hordes of the Republic's Clone Army troopers. During fierce fighting against the droids, the surviving Jedi fighters and Padmé were safely evacuated onto the gunships. Not wanting Dooku to escape and rally more to his cause, Yoda ordered the gunships to target massive structures on the Geonosian planet, and the clone troops were deployed to engage in an even-greater massive land battle against the Separatist's Droid army and its Federation starships. Fearing defeat and retreat, the Geonosian leader Archduke Poggle the Lesser (Marton Csokas) planned to escape in Nute Gunray's ship Lapiz Cutter. Before leaving, he entrusted Count Dooku, who was heading for Coruscant, with his "designs for the ultimate weapon" they were planning to build [the Death Star!]. </p>

<p> In their gunship, Obi-Wan and Anakin tracked escaping Count Dooku on a speeder to a secret hangar tower, where the Count was planning to transport himself away on his inter-stellar solar-sailer ship. As they pursued him, a blast hit their gunship and Padmé was hurled out and tumbled onto the sandy ground. [She was soon rescued by a clone trooper.] Reluctant to continue, Anakin had to be ordered by Obi-Wan to continue their chase without his "personal feelings" getting in the way. The two of them were no match for Dooku's superior "dark side" Jedi Force powers. Without the need of a lightsaber, Dooku fired lightning Forces at Anakin, threw him against a wall and knocked him out, and then with classic swordsmanship skill, he swung his red lightsaber at Obi-Wan. Struck in both the arm and leg, Obi-Wan collapsed to the floor, and watched as Dooku cut off charging Anakin's right arm at the elbow. As both were about to be killed, Master Yoda arrived at the entrance. </p>

<p> Senator Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman) Captain Typho (Jay Laga'aia) Supreme Chancellor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) Anakin Skywalker (Hayden Christensen) Mace Windu (Samuel L. Jackson) Yoda (Frank Oz) Jar Jar Binks (Ahmed Best) R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) Dexter Jettster (Ronald Falk) Zam Wesell (Leeanna Walsman) Taun We (Rena Owen) Prime Minister Lama Su (Anthony Phelan) Jango Fett (Temeura Morrison) Boba Fett (Daniel Logan) Watto (Andrew Secombe) C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) Cliegg Lars (Jack Thompson) Count Dooku/ Sith Lord Darth Tyranus (Christopher Lee) Viceroy Nute Gunray (Silas Carson) Archduke Poggle the Lesser (Marton Csokas) Senator Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits) </p>

<p> The earliest incarnation of a live-action depiction of young Han Solo came during the pre-production of Star Wars: Episode III Revenge of the Sith. Writer and director George Lucas conceived an idea of Solo as a child on Kashyyyk, with Chewbacca raising the young boy like a son. Solo would have been present during the Battle of Kashyyyk and would have encountered Yoda, helping the Jedi Master discover scraps of a droid that could have aided Yoda in determining the whereabouts of General Grievous. Concept art from Iain McCaig showed the young Solo as a slob, a juxtaposition of the character in his later years. "He's such a persnickety guy later — he always has to have the best of everything," McCaig said in The Art of Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, "so I thought it'd be great if when he was a kid, he was an absolute slob." These concepts never made it out of pre-production, and Solo did not appear in Revenge of the Sith—though Chewbacca ultimately did make a cameo appearance during the battle. </p>

<p> After agreeing to the job, Kasdan was also asked to help develop what would become Star Wars: Episode VII The Force Awakens. Once he had completed work on that film, Kasdan felt creatively drained, so he asked his son Jon to assist in developing the Han Solo film. The Kasdans worked on the script for nine months, during which they were inspired by Treasure Island, Heat, Unforgiven, and various films by the Coen brothers. At the urging of the elder Kasdan, Phil Lord and Christopher Miller were hired to direct. Lord and Miller tested several thousand actors for the part, including Harrison Ford impressionist Anthony Ingruber. They ultimately chose Alden Ehrenreich, who had been the first person to audition. According to Miller, they didn't want an impersonation of Ford, but "someone who could evoke the spirit of the iconic performance we all remember while bringing something new and fresh." Ehrenreich was officially announced during Celebration Europe. He (and later, Ron Howard) met with Harrison Ford to discuss the character, and Lucasfilm sent Ford a copy of the script for his approval. Once Ehrenreich was cast, certain parts of the script were revised to be tailored to his voice; the final script also incorporated contributions from Lord, Miller and Howard. As Jon Kasdan told SFX magazine, "I think ultimately the movie that you'll see is truly a product of the five of us all coming together in this weird way to tell this story." </p>

<p> On Thursday June 22, Lucasfilm announced that Ron Howard would take over directorial duties for the film. Howard had worked on three previous Lucasfilm projects: 1973's American Graffiti, 1979's More American Graffiti, and 1988's Willow (which starred Star Wars veteran Warwick Davis, who also appeared in Solo.) After the announcement, Howard said that he had been a fan of Star Wars since the beginning and that he found it "gratifying to be asked to lend my voice to the [Star Wars] universe." Michael Kenneth Williams was originally cast in the film but was unavailable for the reshoots, so he was replaced by Paul Bettany. George Lucas visited the set at one point, and helped direct a scene. On Tuesday October 17, Howard confirmed that production had wrapped up, and he officially announced the title of the film would be Solo: A Star Wars Story. By Friday March 30, 2018, the editing and score were finished, and post-production had ended by Sunday April 22. John Powell composed the film's musical score, and John Williams contributed a new theme. </p>

<p> The BBC reviewer Nicholas Barber gave Solo a mixed review, awarding the film three out of five stars. He wrote that Solo was a "Disney-fied, sub-Guardians of the Galaxy adventure: a lightly comic, family-friendly, action-packed, nigglingly sexist popcorn movie." Barber described Ehrenreich's depiction of Solo as a "likeably goofy hero with an irresistible grin and an air of boyish decency," and compared him favorably to Jake Lloyd and Hayden Christensen, who played Anakin Skywalker in the prequel trilogy. CNN reviewer Brian Lowry wrote that the film had a "messy, flat opening half before rallying and picking up speed down the stretch," which he attributed to the fraught production process. Lowry praised Ehrenreich and Donald Glover's performances as Han Solo and Lando Calrissian, respectively, opining that they captured the spirit of the original-trilogy characters. The New Yorker's Joshua Rothman wrote that "'Solo' is an entertaining movie, with engaging performances, vivid production design, and enthralling action sequences. It's also distressingly forgettable—it's about nothing, an episode of 'Seinfeld' with hyperdrive." </p>

<p> Erin Kellyman appears as Enfys Nest, the leader of a gang of space pirates called Cloud Riders.[41] Jon Favreau voices Rio Durant, a pilot on Beckett's crew,[42][43] and Linda Hunt voices Lady Proxima, the serpent-like leader of the gang to which teenage Han and Qi'ra belong. Ian Kenny portrays Rebolt[44] while Clint Howard portrays Ralakili.[45] Additionally, Anthony Daniels cameos as Tak.[46] Kiran Shah plays Karjj and Warwick Davis briefly reprises his role from The Phantom Menace as Weazel, a Cloud Rider.[47] Ray Park reprises his role as Maul,[48] with Sam Witwer providing the voice, reprising the role from The Clone Wars and Rebels animated TV series.[49] Peter Serafinowicz, Maul's original voice actor in The Phantom Menace, was initially brought in and recorded Maul's dialogue, but his vocal performance was ultimately dropped in favor of Witwer's with the explanation that it was "better for the continuity".[50] Dee Tails[51] appears as Quay Tolsite, the director of the Pyke Syndicate's operations on Kessel.[52] </p>

<p> A first attempt at an appearance of Han Solo as a child was present during the pre-production of Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith in 2002, showing an early draft of a young Solo that takes part in the battle on Kashyyyk.[55] Later, a planned live-action TV series developed by Star Wars creator George Lucas titled Star Wars: Underworld would have depicted Han Solo's first meeting with Chewbacca and his winning the Millennium Falcon from Lando Calrissian.[56][57] In 2012, about three weeks before Lucasfilm became a Disney property, Lawrence Kasdan had a meeting with Lucas and Kathleen Kennedy about relaunching the franchise and was presented with nine film ideas, devised and sketched by Lucas himself, which included the new sequel trilogy and various spin-offs. However, Kasdan wasn't sure if he wanted to make more movies even though the story about Han Solo was the one that inspired him the most, so Lucas commissioned him to write the screenplay.[58][59] After Lucas sold his company to Disney in 2012, Kasdan was hired to help finish the script for Star Wars: The Force Awakens, leaving his son Jonathan Kasdan in charge of writing Solo until his return.[60] The film was internally codenamed "Harry and the Boy" and initially planned to follow The Force Awakens.[61] </p>

<p> In February 2013, Disney CEO Bob Iger confirmed the development of two Star Wars standalone films, one written by Lawrence Kasdan.[62] Shortly thereafter, it was reported that Disney was working on a film featuring Solo.[63] Disney CFO Jay Rasulo described the standalone films as origin stories.[64] In July, Lucasfilm announced that an anthology film focusing "on how [a] young Han Solo became the smuggler, thief, and scoundrel whom Luke Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi first encountered in the cantina at Mos Eisley"[65] would be released on May 25, 2018. The film was supposed to be released after The Force Awakens, but the temporary departure of Kasdan led to the first development of the spin-off Rogue One.[66] The project was to be directed by Phil Lord and Christopher Miller from a script by Lawrence and Jonathan Kasdan. Kathleen Kennedy would serve as a producer, with Lawrence Kasdan and Jason McGatlin as executive producers;[1] Allison Shearmur and Simon Emanuel also produce.[6] Solo's Wookiee friend Chewbacca was also announced to appear in the film.[67][68] In May 2016, Lawrence Kasdan stated that filming would start in January 2017.[69] </p>

<p> In early January 2017, Woody Harrelson was revealed to be in negotiations to portray Han Solo's mentor,[85] and was confirmed to be appearing in the film shortly after.[25] Christian Bale had previously been in discussions for the role.[86] A subsequent interview with Harrelson bolstered speculation that he may be specifically playing Legends character Garris Shrike,[87][88] but Harrelson revealed the character's name as Beckett in March 2017.[26] In February 2017, Phoebe Waller-Bridge joined the cast in an undisclosed role, said to be "a CGI-driven performance" similar to Alan Tudyk in Rogue One as the droid K-2SO.[35] Additionally, it was reported that Thandiwe Newton was in negotiations to star in the film.[89] Waller-Bridge and Newton were confirmed as part of the cast by the end of February, alongside the announcement that Joonas Suotamo would appear as Chewbacca, reprising the role from The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, where he shared it with original Chewbacca actor Peter Mayhew.[6] Michael K. Williams entered talks to join the film in early March 2017,[90] and was confirmed shortly after,[37] portraying a half-human, half-animal creature.[38] By the end of the month, Ian Kenny had joined the cast.[44] Warwick Davis was confirmed as part of the cast by the end of July 2017.[47] </p>

<p> On June 20, 2017, citing "creative differences", Lucasfilm announced that directors Lord and Miller had left the project with a new director "to be announced soon".[2][99] It was reported that the directors were fired after Kennedy and Lawrence Kasdan disagreed with their shooting style;[3][100] Lord and Miller believed they were hired to make a comedy film, while Lucasfilm was looking for the duo only to add "a comedic touch." Lucasfilm also felt the directors were encouraging too much improvisation from the actors, which was believed to be "shifting the story off-course" from the Kasdans' script.[101] To appease Kasdan, who was unhappy with scenes not being filmed "word for word," Lord and Miller shot several takes exactly as written, then shot additional takes.[7] Lord and Miller refused to compromise on certain scenes, such as filming a scene from fewer angles than Lucasfilm expected, thereby reducing the options available in editing.[101][7] The duo were also unhappy when Lawrence Kasdan was brought to the London set, feeling he became a "shadow director".[7] The decision to remove Lord and Miller was made after a short hiatus in filming taken to review the footage so far.[3] The original film editor, Chris Dickens,[6] was also removed from the film, replaced by Pietro Scalia.[7] </p>

<p> It was reported that Ron Howard, who had previously collaborated with Lucas as an actor in American Graffiti (1973) and the director of Willow (1988), was a frontrunner to step in as director. Howard had turned down an offer to direct Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace.[102] Joe Johnston and Kasdan were also considered, though in regards to Kasdan, Directors Guild of America rules state that a replacement for a director may not be someone already involved in the production.[100][103] Two days later, it was announced that Howard would take over directing for the remaining three and a half weeks of scheduled principal photography as well as the scheduled five weeks of reshoots.[4][104] Howard wrote, "I'm beyond grateful to add my voice to the Star Wars universe... I hope to honor the great work already done and help deliver on the promise of a Han Solo film."[105] Howard was expected to arrive in London on June 26 to complete filming.[7] During the reshoots, actor Michael K. Williams was unable to return to the production, due to a schedule conflict with filming The Red Sea Diving Resort, resulting in his part being redeveloped and recast with Paul Bettany.[106] Williams stated the reshoots for his character were "to match the new direction which the producers wanted Ron to carry the film in," and that he would not have been available again until November 2017; the production did not want to wait for his availability to make a release in May 2018.[38] Bettany, who previously worked with Howard on A Beautiful Mind and The Da Vinci Code, had heard of the director's involvement with the film and texted him to inquire into joining the film. "Two weeks later I was flying to London to be in Star Wars," Bettany detailed in a May 2018 interview with The Los Angeles Times.[107] </p>

<p> The visual effects were provided by Industrial Light & Magic, Hybride and Blind LTD and Supervised by Nigel Sumner, Julian Foddy, Greg Kegel, Joseph Kasparian, Francois Lambert, Andrew Booth, Rob Bredow and Patrick Tubach with the help of Jellyfish Pictures, Raynault VFX, Lola VFX and Nvizage.[115] Bredow described working on the train heist scene as a challenge. "I've always in my own life referenced the Star Wars films in terms of having the coolest explosions ever, you know, back to Joe Viskocil's explosions of the Death Star and the way those evolved over time. It was like, 'How am I going to do something that's different and unique in the Star Wars universe?". He would utilize miniature models and built a 3D model of the mountain in the film and blew it up with a variety of firecrackers within a large fish tank built at Pinewood. The team took inspiration from the YouTube channel The Slow Mo Guys, specifically a video of the creators Gavin Free and Daniel Gruchy conducting an experiment that saw them blowing up firecrackers in a fish tank to capture the explosion in slow motion.[116] </p>

<p> In July 2017, John Powell was announced as the main composer of the score.[122] Longtime Star Wars composer John Williams composed and conducted the Han Solo theme, "The Adventures of Han", for the film.[8] Powell began writing the music in late 2017 after finishing his work on Ferdinand. In December 2017, Williams wrote two musical pieces and combined them to create Han's theme. The following month, Williams recorded the demos with the Recording Arts Orchestra of Los Angeles at the Newman Scoring Stage.[123] Powell interpolated Williams' new theme into his score, as well as incorporating music by Williams from previous Star Wars films, including the Star Wars main title, and several motifs and cues from A New Hope, The Empire Strikes Back, and The Phantom Menace.[124] Walt Disney Records released the soundtrack album on May 25, 2018.[123] In September 2020, Powell announced on social media that a deluxe edition of the soundtrack album would be remixed and mastered by 5 Cat Studios, featuring all unedited cues from the score and additional demos that Williams had composed for the film.[125][126][127] The deluxe edition was released on November 20, 2020, featuring an additional 40 minutes of previously unreleased music.[128][129] In December 2020, Mondo had publicly announced the release of the soundtrack on 180g vinyl and limited "hyperspace" vinyl, due for January 2021. </p>

<p> The film opened in 4,381 theaters, the ninth-highest total ever, including 3,300 3D locations and 400 IMAX screens. It grossed $14.1 million from Thursday night previews, the lowest of the Disney Star Wars films but the best-ever for Memorial Day weekend, besting the $13.2 million made by Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007). Including Thursday previews, the film made $35.6 million on its first day, lowering weekend projections to $115 million. It grossed just $84.4 million in its opening weekend (and $103 million over the four–day weekend), far below projections and marking the lowest Star Wars debut since Attack of the Clones (2002), although it did set a new career-high opening for Howard.[147][148] Deadline Hollywood compared the below-expectations opening to Justice League the previous November, and attributed it to fan negativity toward the concept and the behind-the-scenes problems, as well as competition from Deadpool 2 and Avengers: Infinity War.[138] Many analysts and publications, including Deadline, The Atlantic, Entertainment Weekly and CNN, interpreted the low box office returns as a case of "Star Wars fatigue", since Solo was the fourth film of the series released in 29 months, and came just five months after The Last Jedi.[149][150][151] Other analysts attributed the film's underperformance to lackluster marketing,[152][153] as well as the divided fan reception to The Last Jedi.[154] Solo dropped 65% in its second weekend to $29.4 million, the worst sophomore frame for any Star Wars film since the original trilogy.[155][156] It dropped another 46% in its third weekend to $15.7 million, finishing second behind newcomer Ocean's 8, and $10 million in its fourth week, finishing fourth.[157][158] </p>

<p> Worldwide the film was expected to make $285–340 million in its opening weekend, including $150–170 million internationally.[146] It opened in 43 markets on the Wednesday and Thursday prior to its US release and made a total of $11.4 million, including $3.3 million in China.[159] It went on to open to just $65 million internationally and $147.5 million worldwide. It grossed $10.3 million in the United Kingdom, and also finished first in Australia ($5 million), Germany ($4.3 million), France ($3.9 million), Russia ($3.6 million), Spain ($2.6 million), Mexico ($2.5 million), Italy ($2.2 million) and Brazil ($1.3 million). Despite being the second-largest international opening, it made just $10.1 million in China, far below the other three Disney Star Wars films.[160] The film held a better-than-expected 47% in its second weekend, making $30.3 million from 54 countries and remaining the top film in several, including Australia, Spain and the United Kingdom.[161] </p>

<p> Writing for Rolling Stone, Peter Travers gave the film 2.5 stars out of 4, complimenting the cast but criticizing the lack of creativity, saying, "somehow Han Solo—the roguish Star Wars hellion famous for breaking all the rules—finds himself in a feel-good movie that doesn't break any."[166] A. O. Scott of The New York Times said, "It doesn't take itself too seriously, but it also holds whatever irreverent, anarchic impulses it might possess in careful check." He noted that it is "a curiously low-stakes blockbuster, in effect a filmed Wikipedia page".[167] Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter praised the cast and production values but felt the film as a whole felt too safe, writing, "while Ehrenreich's Solo proves adept at maneuvering the Millennium Falcon out of some tight spots, the picture itself follows a safely predictable course. Missing here are the sort of plot-related or visual curveballs thrown by Rian Johnson's The Last Jedi or Gareth Edwards with Rogue One."[168] </p>

<p> On May 25, 2020, fans again used the hashtag #MakeSolo2Happen to show their appreciation for the film on its second anniversary. The hashtag went viral with fans arguing that the film deserved more praise and once again calls were made for a continuation of the story. A number of people tweeting with the hashtag expressed their desire to see more of Emilia Clarke's Qi'ra.[202] Rita Dorsch of Comic Book Resources said that, by far, the most interesting part of Solo is Qi'ra's turn and that any follow-up film needs to focus on her.[203] Writing for CinemaBlend, Dirk Libbey stated "it seems unlikely that the Solo 2 fans will get the movie they want. Of course, some don't actually need a theatrical follow-up. They would be happy with a Disney+ series that didn't even necessarily include Han Solo, but instead focused on the criminal organization being run by Qi'ra."[204] A Marvel comic book crossover series features Qi'ra and Crimson Dawn after the events of The Empire Strikes Back,[205] and an upcoming comic will feature Han, Chewbacca, and Greedo doing a job for Jabba the Hutt.[206] </p>

<p> Erin Kellyman appears as Enfys Nest, the leader of a gang of space pirates called Cloud Riders.[41] Jon Favreau voices Rio Durant, a pilot on Beckett's crew,[42][43] and Linda Hunt voices Lady Proxima, the serpent-like leader of the gang to which teenage Han and Qi'ra belong. Ian Kenny portrays Rebolt[44] while Clint Howard portrays Ralakili.[45] Additionally, Anthony Daniels cameos as Tak.[46] Kiran Shah plays Karjj and Warwick Davis briefly reprises his role from The Phantom Menace as Weazel, a Cloud Rider.[47] Ray Park reprises his role as Maul,[48] with Sam Witwer providing the voice, reprising the role from The Clone Wars and Rebels animated TV series.[49] Peter Serafinowicz, Maul's original voice actor in The Phantom Menace, was initially brought in and recorded Maul's dialogue, but his vocal performance was ultimately dropped in favor of Witwer's with the explanation that it was "better for the continuity".[50] Dee Tails[51] appears as Quay Tolsite, the director of the Pyke Syndicate's operations on Kessel.[52] </p>

<p> A first attempt at an appearance of Han Solo as a child was present during the pre-production of Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith in 2002, showing an early draft of a young Solo that takes part in the battle on Kashyyyk.[55] Later, a planned live-action TV series developed by Star Wars creator George Lucas titled Star Wars: Underworld would have depicted Han Solo's first meeting with Chewbacca and his winning the Millennium Falcon from Lando Calrissian.[56][57] In 2012, about three weeks before Lucasfilm became a Disney property, Lawrence Kasdan had a meeting with Lucas and Kathleen Kennedy about relaunching the franchise and was presented with nine film ideas, devised and sketched by Lucas himself, which included the new sequel trilogy and various spin-offs. However, Kasdan wasn't sure if he wanted to make more movies even though the story about Han Solo was the one that inspired him the most, so Lucas commissioned him to write the screenplay.[58][59] After Lucas sold his company to Disney in 2012, Kasdan was hired to help finish the script for Star Wars: The Force Awakens, leaving his son Jonathan Kasdan in charge of writing Solo until his return.[60] The film was internally codenamed "Harry and the Boy" and initially planned to follow The Force Awakens.[61] </p>

<p> In February 2013, Disney CEO Bob Iger confirmed the development of two Star Wars standalone films, one written by Lawrence Kasdan.[62] Shortly thereafter, it was reported that Disney was working on a film featuring Solo.[63] Disney CFO Jay Rasulo described the standalone films as origin stories.[64] In July, Lucasfilm announced that an anthology film focusing "on how [a] young Han Solo became the smuggler, thief, and scoundrel whom Luke Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi first encountered in the cantina at Mos Eisley"[65] would be released on May 25, 2018. The film was supposed to be released after The Force Awakens, but the temporary departure of Kasdan led to the first development of the spin-off Rogue One.[66] The project was to be directed by Phil Lord and Christopher Miller from a script by Lawrence and Jonathan Kasdan. Kathleen Kennedy would serve as a producer, with Lawrence Kasdan and Jason McGatlin as executive producers;[1] Allison Shearmur and Simon Emanuel also produce.[7] Solo's Wookiee friend Chewbacca was also announced to appear in the film.[67][68] In May 2016, Lawrence Kasdan stated that filming would start in January 2017.[69] </p>

<p> In January 2016, a list of actors in consideration for the role of young Han Solo was revealed, including Emory Cohen, Scott Eastwood, Ansel Elgort, Dave Franco, Blake Jenner, Logan Lerman, Jack Reynor, and Miles Teller.[70] In March 2016, it was reported that Taron Egerton, Alden Ehrenreich, and Reynor were on a shortlist for the role.[71] In May 2016, Ehrenreich was reported to have been cast as the young Han Solo,[21] and was confirmed for the role at Star Wars Celebration Europe III two months later.[22] Miller called casting the role one of "the hardest casting challenges of all time," adding that they "saw over 3,000 people for the part."[72] Other actors to audition for the role included Charlie Cox, Tom Felton, Colton Haynes, Anthony Ingruber, Rami Malek, Jack O'Connell, Glen Powell, Chandler Riggs, Nick Robinson, Joshua Sasse, Aaron Taylor-Johnson, and Ed Westwick.[73][74][75][76][77] </p>

<p> In early January 2017, Woody Harrelson was revealed to be in negotiations to portray Han Solo's mentor,[85] and was confirmed to be appearing in the film shortly after.[25] Christian Bale had previously been in discussions for the role.[86] A subsequent interview with Harrelson bolstered speculation that he may be specifically playing Legends character Garris Shrike,[87][88] but Harrelson revealed the character's name as Beckett in March 2017.[26] In February 2017, Phoebe Waller-Bridge joined the cast in an undisclosed role, said to be "a CGI-driven performance" similar to Alan Tudyk in Rogue One as the droid K-2SO.[35] Additionally, it was reported that Thandiwe Newton was in negotiations to star in the film.[89] Waller-Bridge and Newton were confirmed as part of the cast by the end of February, alongside the announcement that Joonas Suotamo would appear as Chewbacca, reprising the role from The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, where he shared it with original Chewbacca actor Peter Mayhew.[7] Michael K. Williams entered talks to join the film in early March 2017,[90] and was confirmed shortly after,[37] portraying a half-human, half-animal creature.[38] By the end of the month, Ian Kenny had joined the cast.[44] Warwick Davis was confirmed as part of the cast by the end of July 2017.[47] </p>

<p> On June 20, 2017, citing "creative differences", Lucasfilm announced that directors Lord and Miller had left the project with a new director "to be announced soon".[2][99] It was reported that the directors were fired after Kennedy and Lawrence Kasdan disagreed with their shooting style;[3][100] Lord and Miller believed they were hired to make a comedy film, while Lucasfilm was looking for the duo only to add "a comedic touch." Lucasfilm also felt the directors were encouraging too much improvisation from the actors, which was believed to be "shifting the story off-course" from the Kasdans' script.[101] To appease Kasdan, who was unhappy with scenes not being filmed "word for word," Lord and Miller shot several takes exactly as written, then shot additional takes.[8] Lord and Miller refused to compromise on certain scenes, such as filming a scene from fewer angles than Lucasfilm expected, thereby reducing the options available in editing.[101][8] The duo were also unhappy when Lawrence Kasdan was brought to the London set, feeling he became a "shadow director".[8] The decision to remove Lord and Miller was made after a short hiatus in filming taken to review the footage so far.[3] The original film editor, Chris Dickens,[7] was also removed from the film, replaced by Pietro Scalia.[8] </p>

<p> It was reported that Ron Howard, who had previously collaborated with Lucas as an actor in American Graffiti (1973) and the director of Willow (1988), was a frontrunner to step in as director. Howard had turned down an offer to direct Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace.[102] Joe Johnston and Kasdan were also considered, though in regards to Kasdan, Directors Guild of America rules state that a replacement for a director may not be someone already involved in the production.[100][103] Two days later, it was announced that Howard would take over directing for the remaining three and a half weeks of scheduled principal photography as well as the scheduled five weeks of reshoots.[4][104] Howard wrote, "I'm beyond grateful to add my voice to the Star Wars universe... I hope to honor the great work already done and help deliver on the promise of a Han Solo film."[105] Howard was expected to arrive in London on June 26 to complete filming.[8] During the reshoots, actor Michael K. Williams was unable to return to the production, due to a schedule conflict with filming The Red Sea Diving Resort, resulting in his part being redeveloped and recast with Paul Bettany.[106] Williams stated the reshoots for his character were "to match the new direction which the producers wanted Ron to carry the film in," and that he would not have been available again until November 2017; the production did not want to wait for his availability to make a release in May 2018.[38] Bettany, who previously worked with Howard on A Beautiful Mind and The Da Vinci Code, had heard of the director's involvement with the film and texted him to inquire into joining the film. "Two weeks later I was flying to London to be in Star Wars," Bettany detailed in a May 2018 interview with The Los Angeles Times.[107] </p>

<p> The visual effects were provided by Industrial Light & Magic, Hybride and Blind LTD and Supervised by Nigel Sumner, Julian Foddy, Greg Kegel, Joseph Kasparian, Francois Lambert, Andrew Booth, Rob Bredow and Patrick Tubach with the help of Jellyfish Pictures, Raynault VFX, Lola VFX and Nvizage.[115] Bredow described working on the train heist scene as a challenge. "I've always in my own life referenced the Star Wars films in terms of having the coolest explosions ever, you know, back to Joe Viskocil's explosions of the Death Star and the way those evolved over time. It was like, 'How am I going to do something that's different and unique in the Star Wars universe?". He would utilize miniature models and built a 3D model of the mountain in the film and blew it up with a variety of firecrackers within a large fish tank built at Pinewood. The team took inspiration from the YouTube channel The Slow Mo Guys, specifically a video of the creators Gavin Free and Daniel Gruchy conducting an experiment that saw them blowing up firecrackers in a fish tank to capture the explosion in slow motion.[116] </p>

<p> In July 2017, John Powell was announced as the main composer of the score.[120] Longtime Star Wars composer John Williams composed and conducted the Han Solo theme, "The Adventures of Han", for the film.[6] Powell began writing the music in late 2017 after finishing his work on Ferdinand. In December 2017, Williams wrote two musical pieces and combined them to create Han's theme. The following month, Williams recorded the demos with the Recording Arts Orchestra of Los Angeles at the Newman Scoring Stage.[121] Powell interpolated Williams' new theme into his score, as well as incorporating music by Williams from previous Star Wars films, including the Star Wars main title, and several motifs and cues from A New Hope, The Empire Strikes Back, and The Phantom Menace.[122] Walt Disney Records released the soundtrack album on May 25, 2018.[121] In September 2020, Powell announced on social media that a deluxe edition of the soundtrack album would be remixed and mastered by 5 Cat Studios, featuring all unedited cues from the score and additional demos that Williams had composed for the film.[123][124][125] The deluxe edition was released on November 20, 2020, featuring an additional 40 minutes of previously unreleased music.[126][127] In December 2020, Mondo had publicly announced the release of the soundtrack on 180g vinyl and limited "hyperspace" vinyl, due for January 2021. </p>

<p> The film opened in 4,381 theaters, the ninth-highest total ever, including 3,300 3D locations and 400 IMAX screens. It grossed $14.1 million from Thursday night previews, the lowest of the Disney Star Wars films but the best-ever for Memorial Day weekend, besting the $13.2 million made by Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007). Including Thursday previews, the film made $35.6 million on its first day, lowering weekend projections to $115 million. It grossed just $84.4 million in its opening weekend (and $103 million over the four–day weekend), far below projections and marking the lowest Star Wars debut since Attack of the Clones (2002), although it did set a new career-high opening for Howard.[144][145] Deadline Hollywood compared the below-expectations opening to Justice League the previous November, and attributed it to fan negativity toward the concept and the behind-the-scenes problems, as well as competition from Deadpool 2 and Avengers: Infinity War.[136] Many analysts and publications, including Deadline, The Atlantic, Entertainment Weekly and CNN, interpreted the low box office returns as a case of "Star Wars fatigue", since Solo was the fourth film of the series released in 29 months, and came just five months after The Last Jedi.[146][147][148] Other analysts attributed the film's underperformance to lackluster marketing,[149][150] as well as the divided fan reception to The Last Jedi.[151] Solo dropped 65% in its second weekend to $29.4 million, the worst sophomore frame for any Star Wars film since the original trilogy.[152][153] It dropped another 46% in its third weekend to $15.7 million, finishing second behind newcomer Ocean's 8, and $10 million in its fourth week, finishing fourth.[154][155] </p>

<p> Worldwide the film was expected to make $285–340 million in its opening weekend, including $150–170 million internationally.[143] It opened in 43 markets on the Wednesday and Thursday prior to its US release and made a total of $11.4 million, including $3.3 million in China.[156] It went on to open to just $65 million internationally and $147.5 million worldwide. It grossed $10.3 million in the United Kingdom, and also finished first in Australia ($5 million), Germany ($4.3 million), France ($3.9 million), Russia ($3.6 million), Spain ($2.6 million), Mexico ($2.5 million), Italy ($2.2 million) and Brazil ($1.3 million). Despite being the second-largest international opening, it made just $10.1 million in China, far below the other three Disney Star Wars films.[157] The film held a better-than-expected 47% in its second weekend, making $30.3 million from 54 countries and remaining the top film in several, including Australia, Spain and the United Kingdom.[158] </p>

<p> On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, Solo has an approval rating of Lua error in Module:Rotten_Tomatoes_data at line 136: attempt to index field 'wikibase' (a nil value). based on Lua error in Module:Rotten_Tomatoes_data at line 136: attempt to index field 'wikibase' (a nil value). reviews, with an average rating of Lua error in Module:Rotten_Tomatoes_data at line 136: attempt to index field 'wikibase' (a nil value).. The site's critical consensus reads, "A flawed yet fun and fast-paced space adventure, Solo: A Star Wars Story should satisfy newcomers to the saga as well as longtime fans who check their expectations at the theater door."[161] On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 62 out of 100, based on 54 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".[162] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported that 89% of filmgoers gave it positive score, with 73% saying they would recommend it.[136] </p>

<p> Writing for Rolling Stone, Peter Travers gave the film 2.5 stars out of 4, complimenting the cast but criticizing the lack of creativity, saying, "somehow Han Solo—the roguish Star Wars hellion famous for breaking all the rules—finds himself in a feel-good movie that doesn't break any."[163] A. O. Scott of The New York Times said, "It doesn't take itself too seriously, but it also holds whatever irreverent, anarchic impulses it might possess in careful check." He noted that it is "a curiously low-stakes blockbuster, in effect a filmed Wikipedia page".[164] Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter praised the cast and production values but felt the film as a whole felt too safe, writing, "while Ehrenreich's Solo proves adept at maneuvering the Millennium Falcon out of some tight spots, the picture itself follows a safely predictable course. Missing here are the sort of plot-related or visual curveballs thrown by Rian Johnson's The Last Jedi or Gareth Edwards with Rogue One."[165] </p>

<p> On May 25, 2020, fans again used the hashtag #MakeSolo2Happen to show their appreciation for the film on its second anniversary. The hashtag went viral with fans arguing that the film deserved more praise and once again calls were made for a continuation of the story. A number of people tweeting with the hashtag expressed their desire to see more of Emilia Clarke's Qi'ra.[199] Rita Dorsch of Comic Book Resources said that, by far, the most interesting part of Solo is Qi'ra's turn and that any follow-up film needs to focus on her.[200] Writing for CinemaBlend, Dirk Libbey stated "it seems unlikely that the Solo 2 fans will get the movie they want. Of course, some don't actually need a theatrical follow-up. They would be happy with a Disney+ series that didn't even necessarily include Han Solo, but instead focused on the criminal organization being run by Qi'ra."[201] A Marvel comic book crossover series features Qi'ra and Crimson Dawn after the events of The Empire Strikes Back,[202] and an upcoming comic will feature Han, Chewbacca, and Greedo doing a job for Jabba the Hutt.[203] </p>

<p> The earliest incarnation of a live-action depiction of young Han Solo came during the pre-production of Star Wars: Episode III Revenge of the Sith. Writer and director George Lucas conceived an idea of Solo as a child on Kashyyyk, with Chewbacca raising the young boy like a son. Solo would have been present during the Battle of Kashyyyk and would have encountered Yoda, helping the Jedi Master discover scraps of a droid that could have aided Yoda in determining the whereabouts of General Grievous. Concept art from Iain McCaig showed the young Solo as a slob, a juxtaposition of the character in his later years. "He's such a persnickety guy later — he always has to have the best of everything," McCaig said in The Art of Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, "so I thought it'd be great if when he was a kid, he was an absolute slob." These concepts never made it out of pre-production, and Solo did not appear in Revenge of the Sith[18]—though Chewbacca ultimately did make a cameo appearance during the battle.[19] </p>

<p> After agreeing to the job, Kasdan was also asked to help develop what would become Star Wars: Episode VII The Force Awakens. Once he had completed work on that film, Kasdan felt creatively drained, so he asked his son Jon to assist in developing the Han Solo film.[23] The Kasdans worked on the script for nine months,[24] during which they were inspired by Treasure Island, Heat, Unforgiven, and various films by the Coen brothers.[23] At the urging of the elder Kasdan,[25] Phil Lord and Christopher Miller were hired to direct.[2] Lord and Miller tested several thousand actors for the part,[26] including Harrison Ford impressionist Anthony Ingruber.[27] They ultimately chose Alden Ehrenreich, who had been the first person to audition. According to Miller, they didn't want an impersonation of Ford, but "someone who could evoke the spirit of the iconic performance we all remember while bringing something new and fresh."[28][29] Ehrenreich was officially announced during Celebration Europe.[5] He (and later, Ron Howard) met with Harrison Ford to discuss the character, and Lucasfilm sent Ford a copy of the script for his approval.[30] Once Ehrenreich was cast, certain parts of the script were revised to be tailored to his voice; the final script also incorporated contributions from Lord, Miller and Howard. As Jon Kasdan told SFX magazine, "I think ultimately the movie that you'll see is truly a product of the five of us all coming together in this weird way to tell this story."[24] </p>

<p> On June 22, Lucasfilm announced that Ron Howard would take over directorial duties for the film.[1] Howard had worked on three previous Lucasfilm projects: 1973's American Graffiti, 1979's More American Graffiti, and 1988's Willow (which starred Star Wars veteran Warwick Davis, who also appeared in Solo[38]). After the announcement, Howard said that he had been a fan of Star Wars since the beginning and that he found it "gratifying to be asked to lend my voice to the [Star Wars] universe."[39] Michael Kenneth Williams was originally cast in the film but was unavailable for the reshoots,[3] so he was replaced by Paul Bettany.[40] George Lucas visited the set at one point, and helped direct a scene.[41] On October 17, Howard confirmed that production had wrapped up, and he officially announced the title of the film would be Solo: A Star Wars Story.[42] By March 30, 2018, the editing and score were finished,[43] and post-production had ended by April 22.[44] John Powell composed the film's musical score, and John Williams contributed a new theme.[45] </p>

<p> One aspect of these books that I enjoy is Hidalgo’s in-depth look at various facets of the movies. For instance, what we read about coaxium, the highly sought after material in this movie, is rather fascinating, including what we find on page 62: “Coaxium is a form of hypermatter – a precious substance that bridges the dimensions of ‘realspace’ and hyperspace. It is an essential fuel for lightspeed travel. A thin coating of coaxium lines a ship’s hyperdrive reaction chamber and, when energized, allows for transit into the dimension of hyperspace.” Another neat aspect of coaxium is a nice reference to the purrgil we meet in Star Wars Rebels: “Refined coaxium is a far cry from the natural form of the substance. Ancient spacefarers discovered coaxium in the organs of purrgil – huge space-traveling creatures. The purrgil inhale space gases containing traces of the gas Clouzon-36, which they metabolize into a hypermatter fuel. This enables them to jump into hyperspace.” </p>

<p> There were two disappointing omissions for me in this book, however. One was the lack of any mention of Darth Maul, which is greatly disappointing. Many people who saw Solo would probably appreciate helping connect the dots on what he’s been up to since the end of the Clone Wars, as well as how he has been involved with the Crimson Dawn. It would have been fantastic to have a two-page spread on him and his criminal activities. The other omission was utterly baffling to me: there is no picture or mention of the half-headed woman serving drinks on Dryden Vos’ ship. I got very excited when I saw that woman on-screen in the theaters because half-headed humans had appeared in Star Wars: Rogue One: The Ultimate Visual Guide, even if they did not appear in that movie, so it was like a cinematic callback to Hidalgo’s Rogue One Visual Guide, which was neat. I came out of the movie expecting to read about this decraniated servant of Vos’ in the visual guide for Solo, however, I found it peculiar that Hidalgo did not mention the backstory of this particular half-headed woman. </p>

<p> During a confrontation with Enfys, who tracked the team from Vandor, Lando flees in the Falcon, deserting everyone else. Enfys explains to Han that she and her crew are not pirates, but rebels made up of victims from the tyrannical state of the galaxy trying to strike back at the syndicates and the Empire. Han becomes sympathetic to their cause and tries to trick Vos, but the crime lord reveals Beckett has already alerted him to the double-cross. Vos sends his guards to kill Enfys, but the Cloud Riders overpower them instead, leaving Vos defenseless. Having anticipated Vos's strategy, Han tries to take the coaxium, only for Beckett to betray Vos, escaping with it and taking Chewbacca hostage. Qi'ra kills Vos and sends Han after Beckett. She contacts Vos' superior, the former Sith lord Maul, to inform him of the mission's failure, and claim Vos' position. She blames the failure on Beckett, never mentioning Han. Maul orders Qi'ra to meet with him on Dathomir. </p>

<p> In 2014, after The Force Awakens began production, Kasdan turned his attention back to the Han Solo film, this time bringing his son Jon Kasdan on to share writing duties with him. On July 8, it was confirmed that the film would follow a young Han Solo, and be released on May 25, 2018. Phil Lord and Christopher Miller were also confirmed as directors. On May 5, 2016, Alden Ehrenreich was confirmed to star in the film as Han Solo. In July 2016, it was stated the film would be part of a planned trilogy.[2] In August 2016, it was announced that Lando Calrissian would appear in the film and be portrayed by Donald Glover. On March 6, 2017, Michael Kenneth Williams was cast in a role in the film.[3] However, on August 22, 2017, due to scheduling conflicts, he unable to return to set for reshoots under Howard's direction, and his role was announced to have been cut.[4] Paul Bettany was cast in his place, and the character was rewritten and reworked. On June 20, 2017, Lucasfilm's Kathleen Kennedy announced that Phil Lord and Chris Miller are no longer involved with the film due to creative differences.[5] On June 22, 2017, Lucasfilm announced that Ron Howard will take over directing duties.[6] The first official trailer for the film was released on February 5, 2018. </p>

<p> Harrison Ford's Han Solo is one of the greatest figures of Star Wars lore, a lovable rogue who ultimately became a hero. Now, at long last, Lucasfilm's Solo: A Star Wars Story will reveal the character's canon backstory. What events turned Han into such a cynic? How did he earn a life debt from a Wookiee? And did Han actually cheat when he won the Millennium Falcon from Lando? All these questions, and far more fans never thought to ask, will finally be answered.Lucasfilm has assembled an all-star cast, and has striven to keep the film's actual plot under wraps. In addition to younger versions of classic characters, the movie will introduce a whole host of new figures in the Star Wars criminal underground. Many appear to be loosely inspired by the old Expanded Universe, while others remain a mystery. Even the name of what appears to be the main villain has only been revealed through leaked merchandise. Still, the marketing for Solo is kicking up a notch now, and this seems the perfect time to look at what we know for sure about each character.RELATED: Star Wars Characters That Should NOT Cameo In SoloThis Page: Han Solo, Chewbacca, Lando Calrissian, and Qi'Ra </p>

<p> Solo is a fun and modern take on a friendly outlaw Western adventure flick with Han the unlikely hero at the centre of everything – often surrounded by smarter and more powerful characters he looks up to – but it does lack a deeper level of investment that seemed super-glued onto the Star Wars franchise until this point. Alden Ehrenreich sufficiently delivers a similarly as charming but infinitely more innocent portrayal of Han Solo than Harrison Ford did, but his effectiveness in the role is ultimately ruled by the character’s position in the narrative as a want-to-be pilot turned “secret” good guy looking to please every bad father figure he comes across; a characterisation that feels skewed from the Solo we’ve all come to know and love for his resistance to teamwork and general opposition to doing the right thing in the original trilogy. This is where Solo begins to fall down, as through presenting the iconic outlaw as an easily influenced child searching for a meaning to his life and a sense of belonging within his own universe, the movie sets forth an arc that should ultimately see his vision of the universe destroyed and idea of grandiosity crumble, but it doesn’t do this and the entire movie is left without a natural conclusion; it feels void of any real connection or purpose. Han’s arc ends just inches forward from where it began, making for an almost hollow reincarnation of a character that develops more in your own mind as a result of his association with the Han from the other movies than it does of its own accord – the film succeeds in developing a deeper understanding of Han from Episodes 4, 5, 6 and 7 but barely develops anything for the Han from Solo. </p>

<p> It’s an issue that comes to encompass the negatives of Solo as a whole, as the characters we’re familiar with are left with little to nothing from which we can progress our understanding of them with as far as their characterisations in this movie go, while side characters that do have more sufficient character arcs are weighed down by the film’s premise being so irrelevant to anything iconic or even unique to Star Wars lore. Unlike in Rogue One, where the brand new cast of characters were interlaced with the ongoing adventures of the popular central franchise in order to add a sense of meaning to their adventure and to reinforce the popular mythos of the universe, Solo offered much lower stakes, with the central character’s transition from caring, optimistic, loving kid to grumpy “if I have to” Harrison Ford being the only anchor point for a movie that missed the boat entirely in terms of this story thread’s importance and left a feeling like there was something missing that you couldn’t quite put your finger on, but that you knew didn’t quite overwhelm you like The Force Awakens, Rogue One or The Last Jedi did (for better or for worse). </p>

<p> Paul Bettany’s take on the cold and calculated villain Dryden Vos and the highly anticipated Donald Glover portrayal of iconic Empire Strikes Back character Lando Calrissian can each be considered far more positive outcomes for Solo however, with each actor bringing a unique sense of charisma to the screen during their limited involvements, really helping to develop at least a semblance of that special Star Wars feeling that we’ve come to know and love. Similarly as praiseworthy were the visuals, which were phenomenal. In fact, this was one of the more well constructed Star Wars movies in this respect, with the environments being specifically noteworthy for their epic scope and sometimes awe-inspiring construction. Characters, landscapes, weaponry and space-tech were all at their most convincing and at the creative limits of Lucasfilm’s CGI, with the factory-like planet Han occupies in the opening act being one of the more visually striking environments in any Star Wars movie ever. The combination of these very good performances in the face of a level of adversity caused by their underdeveloped characters, as well as the beautiful, seamless CG constructions, did evoke a much more positive outcome than could have been the case without them, and this was matched by the score composed by John Powell which evoked that familiar sense of universal belonging that comes with every famous Star Wars composition. </p>

<p> Solo: A Star Wars Story looked and sounded like a Star Wars movie and will work for fans of the pre-existing mythos who want an extra slice of Han Solo shaped information, but ultimately this film did not live up to what we’ve come to love and expect from the Star Wars franchise because of shoddy characterisations and boundaries placed on the writing that made the necessity of a complete arc for its central character a clear afterthought. As such, Solo is the type of movie that will likely feel long and even perhaps tiresome to someone less knowledgeable or invested, and bears little to no resemblance to the other Disney-owned Star Wars movies in terms of its heart and conviction. This A Star Wars Story comes across like a studio looking to play things safe, hoping that a pre-existing character name will be enough to draw the eye (and the money) from many an expectant fan, but it could also go down as the first movie in a strong down-swing for the franchise under Disney’s ownership and must stand as an example of how fun adventure movies based on popular IPs and centred around well-known and beloved characters do not succeed in a paint-by-numbers, creation-by-committee environment, and that for all the good this movie had, it is this that will ultimately tag Solo as an average 2018 release and mediocre Star Wars movie. Fun but unessential – Rogue One it is not. </p>

<p> The opening crawl reveals that the galaxy is in a state of civil war. The Rebel Alliance has stolen secret plans to Galactic Empire's weapon, the Death Star, an extremely powerful space station capable of annihilating entire planets. In a series of transmissions, the plans were beamed to the rebel blockade runner Tantive IV, a Corellian corvette in the service of Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan. Imperial forces under the command of Darth Vader have captured the rebel ship in a space battle above Tatooine, where Leia had been hoping to enlist the help of Obi-Wan Kenobi, a fugitive Jedi in exile on the planet. Stormtroopers take control of the ship, and Vader arrives to assess the damage. Vader is outraged by the resistance and questions Captain Antilles in a fatal interrogation. Hiding on the ship, Leia is spotted by a squad of troops and is shot with a stun blast. Before taking her prisoner, Vader questions her as well. However, before being transferred to Vader's Star Destroyer, Leia is able to record a holographic message and give it to the droid R2-D2 to take to Obi-Wan. Vader orders a command be sent to the Imperial Senate that the ship was destroyed, with everyone on board killed. R2-D2 and protocol C-3PO use an escape pod which lands them to Tatooine. </p>

<p> Returning to his garage before nightfall, Luke discovers that R2-D2 has escaped. The next day, Luke and C-3PO set out to find R2-D2. After finding him, they are attacked by Sandpeople, but rescued by the arrival of Ben. Luke and the droids are brought to Ben's hut, where he tells of his days as a Jedi Knight (and his true identity as Obi-Wan) and reveals to Luke that his father was a Jedi and a former apprentice as well. When Luke asks how his father died, Obi-Wan says he was "betrayed and murdered" by Darth Vader. He then talks about the mysterious energy field - the Force. Finally, Obi-Wan and Luke see the holographic message from Princess Leia, who asks for Obi-Wan's assistance to take the droid and the plans to planet Alderaan. Obi-Wan invites Luke to Alderaan, but refuses, citing his responsibilities at home. They later discover the same dead Jawas and scattered Bantha tracks. Obi-Wan suspects that Imperial Stormtroopers ambushed the Jawas in an attempt to find the droids. Realizing that the troopers likely learned who the droids were sold to, Luke races back to the Lars homestead, only to find his family murdered and his home destroyed. He returns to Obi-Wan and with nothing left decides to go to Alderaan and become a Jedi. The group goes to Mos Eisley Spaceport, where they encounter a smuggler named Han Solo and co-pilot Chewbacca agreed to transport them on his ship, the Millennium Falcon. (Shortly before, Luke witnesses Obi-Wan's skill with a lightsaber as the old man subdues two fugitives that harass Luke in the cantina where they find Solo.) As the old Jedi and his companions make their way to the ship, they are attacked by Stormtroopers. They hastily board the Falcon and make a speedy launch. After leaving the planet's surface and dodging attacks, the ship and its crew escape. </p>

<p> On the Death Star, Leia remains imprisoned and has resisted interrogation. However, when threatened with the destruction of her home planet of Alderaan, she discloses that the Rebel Base is on Dantooine. Grand Moff Tarkin destroys Alderaan anyway, as a display of the Death Star's power. Later, when it is discovered that the Rebel Base on Dantooine is deserted, Tarkin orders the Princess executed. En route to Alderaan, Obi-Wan instructs Luke in the ways of the Force. When they arrive at where Alderaan should be, the crew discovers only a hail of debris and a moon-sized space station - the Death Star. A tractor beam takes hold of the Falcon and pulls it into the Death Star. Inside, Obi-Wan attempts to disable the tractor beam holding them there. The rest of the group learns that Leia is being held in a nearby cell awaiting execution. They make their way through the station and rescue the Princess. After switching off the tractor beam, Obi-Wan encounters Vader, and a lightsaber duel ensues. The duel distracts the guards long enough to allow Luke and his companions to board the Falcon. Once he sees that they are safely near the ship, Obi-Wan allows himself to be struck down by Vader, which causes Obi-Wan's body to vanish, and allows him to become one with the Force. Luke screams in horror, gaining the attention of the Stormtroopers, who attack Luke and his companions. Obi-Wan advises Luke through telepathy to run into the Falcon. </p>

<p> The Millennium Falcon escapes, fighting off Imperial TIE fighters along the way. Unbeknownst to them, the Imperial planted a homing device on their ship leading to the Rebel Base. They finally reach the Rebel hideout on planet Yavin IV. The Rebel leadership retrieves the Death Star plans from R2-D2 and makes preparations to assault it. The tactic involves flying along a canyon-sized groove in the station's surface, then firing a torpedo down a narrow ventilation shaft. The torpedo will travel to the main reactor and start a chain reaction that will destroy the entire station. Luke and a group of Rebel fighters begin their assault on the approaching Death Star. Several squadrons of Rebel ships are destroyed by Imperial fighters and Luke's "Red" group begins their attack run towards the ventilation port. As Luke makes his run down the canyon, he hears the voice of Obi-Wan, instructing him to use the Force and Luke turns off his tracking computer. Vader closes in on Luke. Just as he is about to deliver a fatal blow on Luke's X-Wing, Han Solo and Chewbacca fly in, shooting and destroying Vader's wingmen. Vader's fighter accidentally got flying out of control and sending it out into deep space. Luke successfully launches torpedoes down the shaft, destroying the Death Star just before it could fire at Yavin IV and scoring a huge victory for the Rebellion against the Empire. Vader is the isolated survivor and flies off elsewhere to reassemble. </p>

<p> In 1997, the movie was digitally remastered as the so-called Special Edition for a 20th anniversary re-release. The controversial (amongst fans) Special Edition contains scenes not in the original release, most notably a conversation between Han Solo and Jabba the Hutt, as well as numerous other small changes and visual additions. Some of the added scenes were intended for the original version of the movie, but were not feasible without newer advances in special effects technology, particularly in the area of computer generated imagery. The Special Edition also had several scenes in which the events depicted were changed from those depicted in the original version; these changes are controversial as well, with many dedicated fans feeling the changes weaken the movie. One of the more notorious changes involves a scene in which Han Solo defeats a bounty hunter named Greedo. Greedo was holding Solo at gunpoint in the Mos Eisley Cantina. Their conversation reveals that Greedo is after the bounty Jabba the Hutt put on Solo. During the conversation, Solo is discretely removing his blaster from its holster under the table. Toward the end of the conversation, Greedo suggests that Jabba might be content to take only Solo's ship (the Millenium Falcon) to cover Solo's debt. Han then says "Over my dead body," to which Greedo replies, "That's the idea. I've been looking forward to this for a long time." In the original version, Solo says "Yes, I bet you have," and then shoots and kills Greedo, who never takes a shot. In the Special Edition, the scene is altered so that Greedo shoots first, somehow missing Solo at point-blank range as Solo fires. This change has been criticized/ridiculed in popular culture, most notably in the films of Kevin Smith. Lucas was apparently concerned that having Solo shoot first portrayed him as an aggressor who takes life in cold blood, which is inconsistent with the heroic persona that Solo is supposed to exemplify. The counterargument is that Greedo clearly intended to kill Solo, and had the capability of doing so. Thus, Solo's shot in the original release was an act of self-defense. Greedo still shoots first in the revised DVD release in 2004, but the effect has been redone to be more convincing. </p>

<p> Tip 1: Give your characters clear motivations. What do they want? What are they afraid of? What drives them? Understanding your characters’ motivations will help you write their actions and dialogue in a way that feels authentic and engaging. Tip 2: Make your characters relatable. Even though Star Wars is a fantasy franchise, your characters should still be relatable to your audience. Give them flaws and struggles that your audience can identify with. This will help them connect with your characters on a deeper level. Tip 3: Develop your characters’ relationships. The relationships between your characters are just as important as their individual personalities. Take the time to develop these relationships in a way that feels natural and believable. Tip 4: Use dialogue to reveal your characters. Dialogue is a great way to reveal your characters’ personalities and motivations. Pay attention to the way your characters speak, and use their dialogue to give your audience insights into their thoughts and feelings. Tip 5: Give your characters a backstory. Every character has a history, even if it’s not explicitly stated in the story. Developing your characters’ backstories will help you understand their motivations and make them more well-rounded. Tip 6: Be consistent with your characters. Once you’ve created your characters, be consistent with their personalities and motivations throughout the story. Don’t have them act out of character just to advance the plot. Tip 7: Get feedback on your characters. Once you’ve written your story, get feedback from other writers or readers. They can help you identify any areas where your characters could be improved. Tip 8: Have fun! Creating characters should be enjoyable. If you’re not having fun, it will show in your writing. So relax, let your imagination run wild, and create some amazing Star Wars characters! </p>

<p> Chewbacca, known affectionately to his friends as Chewie, was a warrior, smuggler, mechanic, pilot, and resistance fighter who fought in the Clone Wars, the Galactic Civil War, and the Cold War and subsequent First Order/Resistance War. He hailed from the planet Kashyyyk and became a Wookiee military leader. During the Clone Wars, he was captured by Trandoshan slavers and held captive on Wasskah, but he worked with a fellow captive, Jedi Commander Ahsoka Tano, to escape. He later commanded Wookiee forces of the Kachirho Wookiee Militia during the Battle of Kashyyyk alongside the Grand Army of the Republic, led by Jedi General Yoda. During the battle, one of the last ones of the war, Yoda's clone troopers received Order 66 from Supreme Chancellor Palpatine and, with the help of Chewbacca and his fellow Wookiee Chieftain and General Tarfful, Yoda escaped Kashyyyk and the destruction of the Jedi Order. </p>

<p> Rex, formerly designated CT-7567, was a veteran Clone Captain, Clone Commander, and Advanced Recon Commando who commanded the Grand Army of the Republic's famed 501st Legion of clone troopers during the Clone Wars. Rex later served as a captain and commander within the Alliance to Restore the Republic during the Galactic Civil War. Rex participated in many battles over the course of the Clone Wars. As the captain of the 501st, Rex served as second-in-command to Jedi General Anakin Skywalker, whose bravery and unconventionality in battle he came to share. In addition to being a close friend of Skywalker, he also became friends with Skywalker's apprentice, Ahsoka Tano. He was close with Marshal Commander Cody, with their relationship mirroring that of their respective Jedi Generals, Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi, whom Rex was also well acquainted with. Rex and his companions often worked together during the front-line campaigns against the Confederacy of Independent Systems. </p>

<p> Han Solo, known only as Han until being given the surname Solo by an Imperial recruitment officer, and formerly known as Cadet 124-329 while serving as an Imperial cadet, was also a smuggler. He became a leader in the Alliance to Restore the Republic and an instrumental figure in the defeat of the Galactic Empire during the Galactic Civil War. He hailed from Corellia and became a smuggler, even completing the Kessel Run in just twelve parsecs with his prized ship, the Millennium Falcon, and coming under the employ of Jabba the Hutt. He was the son-in-law of fallen Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker and Senator Padmé Amidala, husband of Princess Leia Organa, brother-in-law of Jedi Master Luke Skywalker, father of Ben Solo, rivals and close friends with fellow smuggler Lando Calrissian, and best friends with the Wookiee Chewbacca, his trusted copilot who swore a life debt to the Corellian smuggler. Solo ran afoul of Jabba after ditching a shipment of spice to avoid trouble with the Empire, owing the Hutt a great deal of money as a result. His fortune seemed to have changed when he agreed to charter Luke Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and the droids R2-D2 and C-3PO to Alderaan, but he became caught up in the rebellion against the Empire and, after helping Princess Leia Organa escape from the Death Star, briefly fought in the Battle of Yavin, which allowed Skywalker to destroy the superweapon. Solo fought with the Rebellion for a number of years afterward, taking part in numerous operations and battles against the Empire. </p>

<p> Ben Solo fell to the dark side of the Force as Kylo Ren, master of the Knights of Ren and eventual Supreme Leader of the First Order, but returned to the light side shortly before his death. He was born at the end of the Galactic Civil War in 5 ABY, when the Galactic Empire surrendered to the New Republic. His parents, General Han Solo and Princess Leia Organa, were considered great heroes of the Alliance to Restore the Republic, as was his maternal uncle, Jedi Master Luke Skywalker. The heir to the Skywalker bloodline, Ben Solo possessed raw strength in the Force and had the potential for limitless power. During the New Republic Era, Solo was part of a new generation of Jedi apprentices trained by his uncle. He was seduced by the dark side through the machinations of the phantom Dark Lord of the Sith, Darth Sidious, and his creation, Supreme Leader Snoke. Sidious's son had a daughter, Rey, who was born to her mother in 15 ABY. Unknown to any at the time, Solo and Rey were counterparts as a dyad in the Force. </p>

<p> It took all of Han's ingenuity to escape Darth Vader's fleet and jump into hyperspace, but Boba Fett was on his tail aboard the Slave I, operating on Vader's behalf. Han then arrived at Cloud City to meet up with his old friend, Lando Calrissian, and give himself some breathing room to plan his next move in secret. Lando gave Han a warm welcome, but the meeting turned ice-cold when Lando turned over Han, Leia and the others to Darth Vader, who was waiting for them in the dining room. Han ended up tortured, and was then frozen in carbonite to test whether a person could survive that process. The answer was yes, and Vader got ready to freeze Luke the same way to hand him over to the Emperor more easily. Lando had been coerced into helping Vader, but he deeply regretted it, and this prompted him to help everyone flee Cloud City before Luke arrived. This also led to Han being delivered to Jabba the Hutt, and put on display on his palace wall. So, Luke had to launch a rescue mission later on. </p>

<p> Obi-Wan's search leads to Kamino, an ocean planet. There, he discovers a clone army is being produced for the Republic in the name of Sifo-Dyas, a deceased Jedi Master. The bounty hunter Jango Fett serves as their genetic template. Obi-Wan deduces Jango is the bounty hunter he is seeking and places a homing beacon on Jango's ship. He then follows Jango and his clone son Boba to the planet Geonosis. Meanwhile, Anakin is troubled by visions of his mother Shmi in pain, and returns to his homeworld of Tatooine with Padmé to save her. His former owner Watto reveals that he sold Shmi to a moisture farmer named Cliegg Lars, who then freed and married her. Cliegg says Tusken Raiders abducted Shmi one month earlier, and she is likely dead. Anakin finds her at the Tusken campsite, barely alive. After she dies in his arms, an enraged Anakin massacres the entire tribe. He later confesses his actions to Padmé and vows to prevent the deaths of those he loves. </p>

<p> Jack Thompson, Joel Edgerton and Bonnie Piesse appear as members of the Lars family and homestead; respectively as Cliegg Lars, Shmi's husband, Owen's father and Anakin's stepfather; Owen Lars, Cliegg's son, Shmi's stepson, and Anakin's stepbrother; and Beru Whitesun, Owen's girlfriend. Leeanna Walsman appears as Zam Wesell, a shapeshifting Clawdite bounty hunter and partner of Jango Fett, who was given the task of assassinating Padmé. Jay Laga'aia appears as Gregar Typho, Padmé's newly appointed captain of security. Rose Byrne and Alethea McGrath briefly appear as Dormé, Padmé's handmaiden and as Jocasta Nu, the librarian at the Jedi Temple, respectively. Ronald Falk provides the voice of Dexter Jettster, Obi-Wan's Besalisk friend who runs a diner on Coruscant and informs him about Kamino. Daniels and Best also make cameo appearances as Dannl Faytonni and Achk Med-Beq, respectively, attendees of the Coruscant Outlander Club who witness Anakin and Obi-Wan capturing Zam Wesell.[16][17] E! reported that Lucas had asked NSYNC to film a small background cameo appearance, in order to satisfy his daughters. They were subsequently cut out of the film in post-production, although briefly visible during a crowd shot from above.[18][19] David Duchovny turned down an undisclosed role in Attack of the Clones so that he could star in Evolution (2001).[20] The end credits erroneously list Alan Ruscoe as playing Neimoidian senator Lott Dod. The character was actually another Neimoidian, played by an uncredited David Healy and voiced by Christopher Truswell. Archival recordings of Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn from The Phantom Menace, appear as a disembodied ghostly voice heard by Anakin through the Force as he was slaughtering the Tusken Raiders; Qui-Gon also appears earlier in the film in the form of a statue in his likeness during a background scene when Obi-Wan visits the Jedi Archives. Fiona Johnson reprised her The Matrix (1999) role as the Woman in the Red Dress in an Easter egg cameo appearance, with her character named "Hayde Gofai" in later Star Wars media, briefly offering a seductive look to Anakin Skywalker at the Outlander Club.[21] </p>

<p> Like The Phantom Menace, Attack of the Clones furthered technological development, effectively moving Hollywood into the "digital age" with the use of the HDW-F900, developed by Sony and Panavision, a digital camera using an HD digital 24-frame system. This spawned controversy over the benefits and disadvantages of digital cinematography that continues as more filmmakers "convert" to digital filmmaking while many filmmakers oppose it. In contrast to previous installments, for which scenes were shot in the Tunisian desert in temperatures up to 125 °F (51 °C), the camera would still run without complications. Lucas had stated that he wished to film The Phantom Menace on this format but Sony was unable to build the cameras quickly enough.[31][32] Sony's cameras arrived one week before principal photography on Attack of the Clones was about to start.[33] In 2002, Attack of the Clones became the third film to be released that was shot entirely on a 24p digital camera (preceded by 2001's Jackpot and Vidocq).[34] The cameras record in the 16:9 HDCAM format (1080p), although the image was cropped to a 2.40:1 widescreen ratio. The area above and below the 2.40 extraction area was available for Lucas to reframe the picture as necessary in post-production. Despite Lucas' efforts to persuade movie theaters to switch to digital projectors for viewing of Episode II, few theaters did.[35] </p>

<p> There were over 2,000 visual effects shots in the film.[36] The film relied almost solely on digital animatics as opposed to storyboards in order to previsualize sequences for editing early on in the film's production. While Lucas had used other ways of producing motion-based storyboards in the past, after The Phantom Menace the decision was made to take advantage of the growing digital technology.[27] The process began with Ben Burtt's creation of what the department dubbed as "videomatics", so called because they were shot on a household videocamera. In these videomatics, production assistants and relatives of the department workers acted out scenes in front of greenscreen. Using computer-generated imagery (CGI), the previsualization department later filled in the green screen with rough background footage. Burtt then cut together this footage and sent it off to Lucas for changes and approval. The result was a rough example of what the final product was intended to be. The previsualization department then created a finer version of the videomatic by creating an animatic, in which the videomatic actors, props, and sets were replaced by digital counterparts to give a more precise, but still rough, look at what would eventually be seen. The animatic was later brought on set and shown to the actors so that they could understand the concept of the scene they were filming in the midst of the large amount of bluescreen used. Unlike most of the action sequences, the Battle of Geonosis was not story-boarded or created through videomatics but was sent straight to animatics after the department received a small vague page on the sequence. The intent was to create a number of small events that would be edited together for pacing inside the finished film. The animatics department was given a free hand regarding events to be created within the animatic; Lucas only asked for good action shots that he could choose from and approve later.[27] Jackson would fight invisible creatures while filming his scenes.[37] </p>

<p> In addition to introducing the digital camera, Attack of the Clones emphasized "digital doubles" as computer-generated models that doubled for actors, in the same way that traditional stunt doubles did. It also furthered the authenticity of computer-generated characters by introducing a new, completely CGI-created version of the character Yoda. Rob Coleman and John Knoll prepared two tests featuring a CGI-animated Yoda using audio from The Empire Strikes Back. Yoda's appearance in Episode V also served as the reference point for the creation of the CGI Yoda; Lucas repeatedly stated to the animation department that "the trick" to the animation of the CGI Yoda was to make him like the puppet from which he was based, in order to maintain a flow of continuity. Frank Oz (voice and puppeteer for Yoda in the original trilogy and The Phantom Menace) was consulted; his main piece of advice was that Yoda should look extremely old, sore, and frigid.[38] Although, Lucas admitted that he was "scared to death" about how they would pull off the scene.[39] Coleman later explained the process of making the digital Yoda like the puppet version, by saying "When Frank [Oz] would move the head, the ears would jiggle. If we hadn't put that in, it wouldn't look like Yoda."[40] Because of the acrobatics of the lightsaber fight between Count Dooku and Yoda, the then 78-year-old Christopher Lee relied on a stunt double to perform the most demanding scenes instead. Lee's face was superimposed onto the double's body in all shots other than close-ups, which he performed himself. Lucas often called the duel crucial to the animation department, as it had the potential to be humorous rather than dramatic.[38] </p>

<p> English scholar Anne Lancashire describes Attack of the Clones as "thoroughly political in its narrative", to the point that interpersonal relations are made subordinate to the political drama that unfolds, and "a critique of the increasing role played by economic and political appetite in contemporary First World international politics in general". In this political drama, the Trade Federation, the former idealist Dooku, and Palpatine "[represent] the economic and political greed and ambition ... of the political and business classes", while the intuition of the Jedi has been clouded by the dark side of the Force. The cityscape of Coruscant, the location of the Jedi Temple, is a dystopian environment that refers to 1982's Blade Runner.[47] Nevertheless, the Jedi endure as the heroes; Obi-Wan's role has been noted as similar to that of James Bond,[48] and Zam Wesell's attempt on Padmé's life is similar to a scene in the first 007 film, Dr. No.[49] Furthermore, the Geonosis arena fight scene is a reference to the 2000 Ridley Scott film, Gladiator.[50] </p>

<p> The prequel trilogy films often refer to the original trilogy in order to help connect the films together. Lucas has often referred to the films as a long poem that rhymes.[51] Such examples include the line "I have a bad feeling about this", a phrase used in each film, and lightsaber duels which almost always occur over a pit. As with Attack of the Clones, The Empire Strikes Back was the middle film in a trilogy, and of the original trilogy films, The Empire Strikes Back is the object of the most references in Attack of the Clones. In both films, an asteroid field is the backdrop of a major star battle in the middle of the film. Obi-Wan escapes Jango Fett by attaching his spacecraft to an asteroid in order to disappear from the enemy sensors; Han Solo uses a similar tactic by attaching the Millennium Falcon to a Star Destroyer in The Empire Strikes Back. John Knoll confirms on the film's DVD commentary that Boba Fett, who would later catch Solo in the act in The Empire Strikes Back, "learned his lesson" from the events of Attack of the Clones.[46] The Galactic Republic's clone troopers also establish the origin of the stormtroopers that play an important role in the original trilogy.[citation needed] The titles of both films refer to the response of the primary galactic government to a threat of rebellion.[citation needed] </p>

<p> In November 2001, three teaser trailers for Attack of the Clones were released, which were shown on the Internet, as well as the DVD-ROM selection of The Phantom Menace DVD release. The first one was released on November 2 with the Disney/Pixar film Monsters, Inc. in theaters.[52] A second teaser debuted online three days later on November 5. This was followed by a third teaser trailer, which was released on November 16 with the global release of Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone in the United States. Just like its predecessor, fans paid full admission at theaters to see the trailers.[53] The next full trailer premiered on Fox Network on March 10, 2002, between airings of Malcolm in the Middle and The X-Files.[54] It made its theatrical debut five days later on March 15 with the opening of Ice Age.[55] The trailer was made available on the official Star Wars website the same day.[56] The outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas from Chicago predicted before the film's release that U.S. companies could lose more than $319 million in productivity due to employees calling in sick and then heading to theaters to see the film.[57] </p>

<p> Attack of the Clones was released on DVD and VHS on November 12, 2002 by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment.[66] On the first day of release, over 4 million DVD copies were sold, becoming the third-highest single-day DVD sales of any film, behind Monsters, Inc. and Spider-Man.[67] This THX certified two-disc DVD release consists of widescreen and pan and scan fullscreen versions.[66] The set contains one disc with the film and the other one with bonus features. The first disc features three randomized selected menus, which are Coruscant, Kamino and Geonosis. There is an Easter egg located in the options menu. When the THX Optimizer is highlighted, the viewer can press 1-1-3-8. By doing this, some bloopers and DVD credits will be shown.[68] The DVD also features an audio commentary from director George Lucas, producer Rick McCallum, editor and sound designer Ben Burtt, ILM animation director Rob Coleman, and ILM visual effects supervisors Pablo Helman, John Knoll, and Ben Snow. Eight deleted scenes are included along with multiple documentaries, which include a full-length documentary about the creation of digital characters and two others that focus on sound design and the animatics team. Three featurettes examine the storyline, action scenes, and love story, and a set of 12 short web documentaries cover the overall production of the film.[69] </p>

<p> Numerous critics characterized the dialogue as "stiff" and "flat".[87] The acting was also disparaged by some critics.[88] Conversely, other critics felt fans would be pleased to see that Jar Jar Binks has only a minor role.[89] Additionally, Jar Jar's attempts at comic relief seen in The Phantom Menace were toned down; instead, C-3PO reprised some of his bumbling traditions in that role. McGregor referred to the swordplay in the film as "unsatisfactory" when comparing it to the climactic duel in Revenge of the Sith as it neared release.[90] ReelViews.net's James Berardinelli gave a positive review, saying "in a time when, more often than not, sequels disappoint, it's refreshing to uncover something this high-profile that fulfills the promise of its name and adds another title to a storied legacy."[91] Jeffrey Westhoff of Northwest Herald gave the film a two out of four scoring, explaining that "the battling Yoda looks ludicrous, like Kermit the Frog in a Matrix fight scene."[92] Steven Rea of The Philadelphia Inquirer gave it a two-and-a-half out of four rating, stating that "this thing will have your mind glazed over faster than a glob of dough in a Krispy Kreme plant."[93] </p>

<p> Roger Ebert, who had praised the previous Star Wars films, gave Episode II only two out of four stars, noting "[As] someone who admired the freshness and energy of the earlier films, I was amazed, at the end of Episode II, to realize that I had not heard one line of quotable, memorable dialogue." About Anakin and Padmé's relationship, Ebert stated, "There is not a romantic word they exchange that has not long since been reduced to cliché."[88] In a mixed review, Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times said, "Only a teenage boy could find this kind of stuff continually diverting, and only a teenage boy would not notice flimsy emotions and underdeveloped acting. It seems George Lucas, like Peter Pan, has never really grown up."[94] Leonard Maltin, who also liked all of the previous installments, awarded two stars out of four to this endeavor as well, as seen in his Movie and Video Guide from the 2002 edition onward. Maltin cited an "overlong story" as reason for his dissatisfaction and added "Wooden characterizations and dialogue don't help."[95] </p>

<p> During its opening day, Attack of the Clones made $30.1 million, combined with $6 million from midnight screenings.[96][97] At that point, it had the highest Thursday gross of any film, taking the former record held by Independence Day.[98] It would go on to make $116.3 million within its first four days of release, making it the second-fastest film to approach the $100 million mark, behind Spider-Man.[99] Plus, it had already grossed $80 million over the weekend,[100] becoming the third-highest three-day opening weekend of all time, after Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone and Spider-Man.[101] Attack of the Clones had the highest opening weekend for a 20th Century Fox film until 2003 when it was taken by X2.[102] That year, The Matrix Reloaded beat Attack of the Clones for having the biggest Thursday opening of any film.[103] The film would stay at the top of the box office for two weeks until it was dethroned by The Sum of All Fears.[104] </p>

<p> Attack of the Clones grossed $310,676,740 in North America and $338,721,588 overseas for a worldwide total of $649,398,328. Though a box office success, it was nevertheless overshadowed by the even greater box office success of The Phantom Menace three years earlier.[2] It was not the top-grossing film of the year, either in North America (where it finished in third place) or worldwide (where it was fourth), the first time that a Star Wars film did not have this distinction. In North America, it was outgrossed by Spider-Man and The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers, both of which were more favorably received by critics. Worldwide, it was also outgrossed by Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets. Adjusted for inflation, Attack of the Clones is the lowest-performing live-action Star Wars film at the North American box office, though is still among the 100 highest-grossing films of all time when adjusted for inflation. The film sold an estimated 52,012,300 tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.[105] </p>

<p> Internationally, Attack of the Clones made $69.1 million during its opening weekend from 71 countries, breaking Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone's record for having the largest international opening weekend.[106] The combined total gross increased to $173.9 million, making it the highest worldwide opening weekend at that time.[106] It made a total opening weekend gross of $54 million in Europe, with $17 million from the UK, $11 million from Germany, $7.6 million from France and $4.5 million from Spain.[107] The film also recorded the highest opening weekend in Hungary, surpassing The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring.[108] In the UK, the film beat out About a Boy to reach the number one spot, ranking behind Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone as the country's second-highest opening weekend.[109] Until the release of Finding Nemo in 2003, it was one of the highest-grossing digital films at the Manchester UCI Cinemas.[110] With a total gross of $954,000, Attack of the Clones had the second-highest opening of any film in Singapore, behind The Lost World: Jurassic Park.[111] Meanwhile, in Japan, it earned a total of $13.8 million in its first two days of release, joining The Phantom Menace, Mission: Impossible 2 and A.I. Artificial Intelligence to rank themselves in the list of the country's top five highest opening weekends of all time.[112] Outside the United States and Canada, the film grossed over $10 million in Australia ($18.9 million), France and Algeria ($30.6 million), Germany ($35 million), Italy ($12.9 million), Japan ($78.1 million), Spain ($16.1 million), and the United Kingdom and Ireland ($58.7 million).[2] </p>

<p> In the archivist field, the film has been critically approached for its depiction of a librarian stereotype in the character Jocasta Nu, the Jedi archivist/librarian of the Jedi Temple library. Some have noted that the archives depicted in the film resembles a library, while Nu wears clothing which represents her "devotion to knowledge and learning" and provides reference assistance to Obi-Wan Kenobi.[124][125] For instance, scholar Eric Ketelaar argued that Nu is an example of an archivist that "mediates, shares, or obstructs" power of the archives, as dictated by the film's plot.[126][127] In contrast, former Society of American Archivists president Randall C. Jimerson stated that the film provides a "more confident view of archives" than other media, showing the powerful and confident role of an archivist despite "archival sabotage".[128] Otherwise, Richard Pearce-Moses, stated the Nu's notion, that information not within the archives doesn't exist, is a "naïve" and is believed by some in regard to information not on the internet.[129] </p>

<p> Within the movie, Geonosian style execution is a form of capital punishment practiced on the planet Geonosis. The origin of the term is that it was originally employed by the Geonosians. The scene depicting this method takes place in the Geonosian arena with the condemned chained to a pole, awaiting execution. The beast-like creatures approach from the arena door, and attack and eat the condemned persons in the manner of a wild beast. Count Dooku sentenced Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker, and Padmé Amidala to be executed in this method. However, the executions were nullified by the timely arrival of Jedi reinforcements, led by Jedi Master Mace Windu. This scene appears to be influenced by an execution method employed by the ancient Romans at the Colosseum where lions and other dangerous predator animals were permitted to have their way with condemned prisoners. The scene also seems to reference some of Ray Harryhausen's special effects scenes of the 1950s, particularly the fight with a giant crab in The Seventh Voyage of Sinbad (1956). </p>

<p> That night, the assassin Zam Wesell makes another attempt on Amidala's life, though the Jedi are able to foil her plot. They pursue her through Galactic City, eventually disarming her in the Outlander Club. Upon being questioned by Obi-Wan and Anakin outside the bar, she is killed by a saberdart, fired by a mysterious man, before the Jedi can learn the name of her employer. Returning to the Jedi Temple, Obi-Wan is assigned by the council to track down the assassin's killer. Meanwhile, Anakin continues his task of protecting the Senator and is asked to escort her back to her home planet of Naboo. Anakin welcomes the opportunity, as he often becomes angry and frustrated by Obi-Wan's criticism and is glad to have an opportunity to be on his own. Further, he has become infatuated with Padmé and relishes the chance to spend time with her. Junior Representative Jar Jar Binks assumes Amidala's duties in her absence, despite the Senator being mad at not being at the Senate when the fate of the Military Creation Act is decided. </p>

<p> During the investigation, Obi-Wan is led to a mysterious planet called Kamino— missing from the Jedi Archives— where he discovers a secret clone army being developed for the Republic. He is told by Prime Minister Lama Su that the military was ordered almost ten years ago by Jedi Master Sifo-Dyas— although Obi-Wan was "under the impression" that Sifo-Dyas was killed before that time. A bounty hunter named Jango Fett was hired as the template for the clones. Obi-Wan meets Jango on Kamino and believes him to be the killer he has been tracking. He tries to capture Jango, which leads to a titanic one-on-one fight between them. Jango makes use of his blasters and missile equipment, managing to defeat Obi-Wan by sending him plummeting into the raging sea below. Thinking he is dead, Jango departs Kamino with his son Boba. Unable to capture Jango, Obi-Wan places a homing beacon on his ship, Slave I, and follows him to the planet of Geonosis. </p>

<p> Anakin is also troubled by a newfound sense that his mother is in grave danger, and he beckons for Padmé to accompany him to his home planet of Tatooine— in the process, disobeying Obi-Wan's orders to remain on Naboo. Upon arriving, Anakin tracks down his former owner Watto, from whom he learns that his mother has married a moisture farmer named Cliegg Lars, and travels to the Lars moisture farm. There, Anakin and Padmé find C-3PO, and the droid introduces Anakin to his step-brother Owen. Cliegg tells Anakin the horrible truth that his mother was kidnapped a month ago by a pack of Tusken Raiders. Anakin travels through the night and finds her tied and beaten in a Tusken camp. Within moments, she dies in his arms. Enraged and heartbroken, he massacres the Tusken community: men, women, and even children. On Coruscant, Yoda senses a terrible darkness in the Force as the slaughter continues (Qui-Gon Jinn's voice shouts "Anakin, Anakin, no!" during this scene). Anakin then brings his mother's body back to the homestead, where her funeral is held. </p>

<p> Back on Geonosis, Count Dooku tries to persuade Obi-Wan to join him, using the fact that he was once Qui-Gon's master, that Qui-Gon, if alive, would have joined Dooku and that the Republic and Jedi have lost their ways and must be fought against. Obi-Wan refuses to join Dooku, saying that Dooku is wrong about the Republic and Jedi losing their ways and that Qui-Gon would have never joined Dooku if Qui-Gon was alive. Anakin and Padmé arrive on the planet but are quickly captured by Jango Fett and sentenced to death, joining Obi-Wan in the Geonosis arena, where they are to be executed. Moments before heading outside, Padame and Anakin confess their love to each other. In the high stands, Count Dooku, Nute Gunray, Rune Haako, Poggle the Lesser, Jango Fett, and Boba Fett watch the start of the planned execution. The trio are forced to battle a reek, a nexu, and an acklay while in chains. During their struggle, Mace Windu arrives with his Jedi strike team, and they battle Dooku's droid army in the arena. Upon seeing so many Jedi in one place, Jango Fett jetpacks down to the arena floor and engages Windu. After a short struggle, Windu kills Jango due to his jetpack malfunctioning. While the Jedi put up a fight, they are eventually overwhelmed by the Droid Army's numerical advantage and appear to be heading into defeat. Yoda unexpectedly arrives with the Republic's new clone army, but only a handful of Jedi have survived. </p>

<p> An even larger battle erupts outside the arena between the Republic's clone army and the Droid Army of the Confederacy of Independent Systems. Nute Gunray and Rune Haako subsequently retreat in Gunray's ship. The Clone Army gains the upper hand, which eventually leads to the Droid Army retreating. Poggle the Lesser entrusts Count Dooku with the early plans for the Death Star. Dooku attempts to escape, but Obi-Wan and Anakin track him to a secret hangar. Anakin immediately disobeys Obi-Wan's orders to take Dooku together and rushes at Dooku, who fires forced lightning at Anakin, tossing him to the side to some rocks, knocking him unconscious temporarily. Obi-Wan circles Dooku cautiously, who says that his powers are far beyond Obi-Wan's powers and fires force lightning at Obi-Wan, who blocks it with his lightsaber and says that he does not think so as Dooku ignites his curved hilted crimson red lightsaber. Obi-Wan rushes at Dooku, engaging him in a lightsaber duel. Unfortunately, while Obi-Wan is powerful, he is no match for Dooku who taunts him that Master Yoda praises Obi-Wan greatly and that he is disappointed in Obi-Wan's lack of skill. The battle lasts around half a minute as Obi-Wan is defeated. Dooku swings his blade high over his head and brings it down as Anakin, who had just awoken from being tossed to the rocks, leaped foward and blocked Dooku's killing strike on Obi-Wan, engaging Dooku, who toyed with him for several minutes before slicing off Anakin's right hand and force pushing it to the ground next to the defeated Obi-Wan. Dooku puts away his lightsaber. Yoda appears just as Dooku is about to escape, and the two masters of the Force go head-to-head in a fierce battle of the force and then a lightsaber duel with Yoda using his acrobatic style and Dooku using his elegant style. Dooku, realizing he can't defeat Yoda, attempts to topple a large pillar on Obi-Wan and Anakin as a distraction. While Yoda uses the Force to divert the pillar, Dooku flees in his solar sailer. Flying to the Works in the Industrial sector of Coruscant, he meets up with his master, Darth Sidious, who is pleased that the war has begun as planned. </p>

<p> Principal photography lasted from Monday June 26 to Wednesday September 20, 2000. Filming primarily occurred at Fox Studios, Sydney, with additional location shooting in Tunisia desert. During the Tunisia shoot, the final scene intended for Star Wars: Episode III Revenge of the Sith was shot to avoid returning to the country for a single scene. Other filming locations included the Plaza de España Seville in Spain, and in Italy at the Villa del Balbianello on Lake Como and the Caserta Palace. Pick-up shots took place in Ealing Studios. John Knoll told Star Wars Insider that adapting to digital cameras was the biggest challenge his team faced as production started on Attack of the Clones. However, the advantage of digital cameras—which could immediately play back footage whenever the team wished—became clear to Knoll, who greatly enjoyed shooting with them. When he was interviewed in 2005 by Temuera Morrison during an episode of the The Tem Show, Rick McCallum stated that New Zealand was among one of their chosen filming locations prior to Australia, but due to the The Lord of the Rings films being filmed in New Zealand around the same time, there were going to be complications. While filming in New Zealand was going to be an issue, Lucasfilm Ltd. casting directors still traveled around the country, picking up several actors in New Zealand, among these being Bodie Taylor and Daniel Logan. </p>

<p> In December 2001, it was rumored that members of *NSYNC were filmed as extras in Attack of the Clones. In the following days, the story gained momentum, and it was reported that three band members—Joey Fatone, JC Chasez, and Chris Kirkpatrick—were given parts as Jedi and Naboo citizens by producer Rick McCallum. Lucasfilm then later confirmed the news but denied the rumours that it was done by George Lucas as a favour to his daughters Katie and Amanda, who were fans of the band. Also, Justin Timberlake acknowledged that he and Lance Bass were not involved, but that Joey Fatone's brother Steven Fatone was. Many Star Wars fans reacted negatively to the news, seeing this incident as further evidence of Star Wars "selling out," similar to some Star Wars fans' reactions to Jar Jar Binks or the Ewoks. On Saturday January 12, 2002, a Saturday Night Live sketch showed a satirical "first look" at Attack of the Clones, wherein the movie ground to a halt to allow *NSYNC to perform an impromptu musical number entitled "I'm a Jedi Knight in these Jedi Days." Joey Fatone later announced that the singers' parts had been cut from the film because of the negative fan reaction. However, Lucasfilm's Lynne Hale denied this, saying that it was up to Lucas, and that "the final edit of the film is what he determines it will be." </p>

<p> A book version of the movie was written by R. A. Salvatore. It includes scenes created by Salvatore and unique to the novel. The book's prologue describes Anakin, while flying to Ansion with Obi-Wan, having a nightmare of his mother turning into glass and shattering. The following pages relate the events leading up to Shmi Skywalker's capture by Tusken Raiders and Cliegg Lars's loss of his leg while attempting to rescue her. These scenes give a more detailed insight into Shmi's life on the moisture farm and her relationships with Cliegg, Owen, Beru, and C-3PO than can be provided in the film. Interspersed with these events are scenes of Senator Amidala on Naboo prior to her departure for Coruscant to vote on the Military Creation Act. She discusses with her sister the question of retiring from politics to start a family and receives reports about the unrest (briefly mentioned in the film) among spice miners on Naboo's moons. The book also delves more deeply than the film into the father-son relationship of Jango and Boba Fett, making Jango's death more emotionally meaningful. (However, it also has several inaccuracies concerning Jango. For example, the author referred to his Armor as grey, when it is actually white with blue accents.) The first of the Boba Fett series of young adult novels draws upon this material. </p>

<p> Despite the Walt Disney Company's 2012 purchase of Lucasfilm Ltd. and the release rights to all future Star Wars films, Fox was to retain original distribution rights to Star Wars: Episode IV A New Hope, which they co-produced and co-financed, in perpetuity in all media worldwide. Fox was also to retain theatrical, nontheatrical, and home video rights worldwide for the franchise's five subsequent films, which Lucasfilm produced and financed independently, through May 2020, at which time ownership was to transfer to Disney. This complex relationship between Fox and Disney, particularly in regards to Fox's perpetual rights to Episode IV, was to create an obstacle for any future boxed set comprising all nine films. On Thursday December 14, 2017, The Walt Disney Company announced that it was acquiring most of Fox's parent company, 21st Century Fox, including the film studio and all distribution rights to A New Hope. On Wednesday March 20, 2019, the deal was officially completed. On Friday April 12, 2019, a Blu-ray box set containing the nine main instalments of the Star Wars saga remastered in 4K was reportedly announced to be in development for a 2020 release. </p>

<p> Obi-Wan's investigation leads him to the remote ocean planet Kamino, where he discovers an army of clones is being produced for the Republic, with bounty hunter Jango Fett serving as their genetic template. Obi-Wan deduces Jango to be the bounty hunter he is seeking, and follows him and his clone son Boba to the desert planet Geonosis via a homing beacon placed on their ship, the Slave I. Meanwhile, Anakin becomes troubled by premonitions of his mother Shmi in pain, and travels to Tatooine with Padmé to save her. They meet Owen Lars, Anakin's stepbrother who is the son of Shmi's new husband Cliegg Lars. Cliegg tells Anakin that Shmi was abducted by Tusken Raiders weeks earlier and is most likely dead. Determined to find her, Anakin ventures out and finds the Tusken campsite. He discovers too late that his mother has been tortured by the tribe. As she dies from her wounds, Shmi reunites with Anakin. Anakin kills the Tuskens in his rage and returns to the Lars homestead with Shmi's body. After revealing his deed to Padmé, Anakin says that he wants to prevent death. </p>

<p> Padmé Amidala and her guards arrive at Coruscant for an important vote. Padmé is now a senator, not a queen. As Padmé and her escorts land, her ship was bombed, and it was destroyed, killing several guards, and the decoy senator. Padmé and Captain Typho head into their hotel, with 2 Jedi protectors, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker. While Padmé is sleeping, a bounty hunter named Zam Wesell loads a droid with 2 very poisonous slug like creatures. The droid cuts a hole in the glass, and drops the slugs. Anakin jumps in and slashes the slugs. Obi-Wan jumps out the window and grabs a hold of the droid. Anakin hurries to find a speeder to race after Obi-Wan. As Obi-Wan was holding on, Zam uses her KiSteer 1284 Projectile Rifle to destroy the droid, causing Obi-Wan to fall down in traffic. Anakin races after Obi-Wan and he intercepts Obi-Wan as they chase Zam. Anakin takes a shortcut around the tunnel that Zam went in. As Obi-Wan says, we´re lost, Anakin jumps down and lands on Zam's speeder. After a short fight, Zam has to pilot her speeder down near a club. As Anakin races in, Obi-Wan stops him. He says, ¨This weapon is your life.¨ He also says that she went in there to hide, and Anakin then says that she is a shifter. Obi-Wan then says we´d best be extra careful. As Obi-Wan is getting a drink, Zam sneaks up on him, with her blaster drawn. Obi-Wan ignites his lightsaber, and in one quick slash, cuts her hand off. Anakin and Obi-Wan take her outside, where they ask her who hired her. She tells them, ¨A bounty hunter called-¨ she was stopped abruptly by a poison dart that was shot by someone from afar. </p>

<p> Anakin asks Watto where his mother is, and Watto says that he sold her to a man named Cliegg Lars. Cliegg said that he took good care of her, even married her. But one day, she went out to pick some food, and she never returned, he thought that tusken raiders took her. Anakin asked why he was not looking for her, and Cliegg said, after he got injured, he could not go out and look anymore. Anakin then gets on a speeder and goes to a tusken raider camp. Anakin finds his mother, very weak and strapped up to a pole. After she dies, out of rage, Anakin kills every tusken raider there. He brought his mother's body back, where they buried her. Later that day, Anakin was fixing a circuit board, when Padmé comes in and asks whats wrong. He answers, he felt ashamed because he killed the raiders, not just the men, but the woman and children too. R2 then comes out of the ship, with a message from Obi-Wan, that he was trapped on Geonosis, and he thinks something is wrong there. Anakin tells Padmé that they need to transmit the message and stay here, but Padmé says, that Anakin is her protector, and she is going to Geonosis, so Anakin has to come. </p>

<p> Anakin, Obi-Wan, and Padmé were sentenced to death, as each person got their own animal that was going to kill them, Obi-Wan, an Acklay, Anakin, a Reek, and Padmé, a Nexu. Each very deadly. Obi-Wan makes the acklay to cut his chains, even though his hands where still binded, he was free from the pole. Anakin jumps up and onto the charging reek, as he heyas it, and then falls off of it, being dragged along beside it. Padmé was scratched in the back, as she then kicks the nexu, and as it falls, Anakin comes with the reek, that he used the force to tame, and kills the nexu. Padmé jumps onto the reeks back, as the head over to Obi-Wan. Obi-Wan rolls to the right, constantly avoiding the acklays big claw like feet. Obi-Wan then jumps onto the reek, as droidekas come out, and surround the 3. </p>

<p> That night, the assassin Zam Wesell makes another attempt on Amidala's life, though the Jedi are able to foil her plot. They pursue her through Galactic City, eventually disarming her in the Outlander Club. Upon being questioned by Obi-Wan and Anakin outside the bar, she is killed by a saberdart, fired by a mysterious man, before the Jedi can learn the name of her employer. Returning to the Jedi Temple, Obi-Wan is assigned by the council to track down the assassin's killer. Meanwhile, Anakin continues his task of protecting the Senator and is asked to escort her back to her home planet of Naboo. Anakin welcomes the opportunity, as he often becomes angry and frustrated by Obi-Wan's criticism and is glad to have an opportunity to be on his own. Further, he has become infatuated with Padmé and relishes the chance to spend time with her. Junior Representative Jar Jar Binks assumes Amidala's duties in her absence, despite the Senator being mad at not being at the Senate when the fate of the Military Creation Act is decided. </p>

<p> During the investigation, Obi-Wan is led to a mysterious planet called Kamino— missing from the Jedi Archives— where he discovers a secret clone army being developed for the Republic. He is told by Prime Minister Lama Su that the military was ordered almost ten years ago by Jedi Master Sifo-Dyas— although Obi-Wan was "under the impression" that Sifo-Dyas was killed before that time. A bounty hunter named Jango Fett was hired as the template for the clones. Obi-Wan meets Jango on Kamino and believes him to be the killer he has been tracking. He tries to capture Jango, which leads to a titanic one-on-one fight between them. Jango makes use of his blasters and missile equipment, managing to defeat Obi-Wan by sending him plummeting into the raging sea below. Thinking he is dead, Jango departs Kamino with his son Boba. Unable to capture Jango, Obi-Wan places a homing beacon on his ship, Slave I, and follows him to the planet of Geonosis. </p>

<p> Anakin is also troubled by a newfound sense that his mother is in grave danger, and he beckons for Padmé to accompany him to his home planet of Tatooine— in the process, disobeying Obi-Wan's orders to remain on Naboo. Upon arriving, Anakin tracks down his former owner Watto, from whom he learns that his mother has married a moisture farmer named Cliegg Lars, and travels to the Lars moisture farm. There, Anakin and Padmé find C-3PO, and the droid introduces Anakin to his step-brother Owen. Cliegg tells Anakin the horrible truth that his mother was kidnapped a month ago by a pack of Tusken Raiders. Anakin travels through the night and finds her tied and beaten in a Tusken camp. Within moments, she dies in his arms. Enraged and heartbroken, he massacres the Tusken community: men, women, and even children. On Coruscant, Yoda senses a terrible darkness in the Force as the slaughter continues (Qui-Gon Jinn's voice shouts "Anakin, Anakin, no!" during this scene). Anakin then brings his mother's body back to the homestead, where her funeral is held. </p>

<p> Back on Geonosis, Count Dooku tries to persuade Obi-Wan to join him, using the fact that he was once Qui-Gon's master, that Qui-Gon, if alive, would have joined Dooku and that the Republic and Jedi have lost their ways and must be fought against. Obi-Wan refuses to join Dooku, saying that Dooku is wrong about the Republic and Jedi losing their ways and that Qui-Gon would have never joined Dooku if Qui-Gon was alive. Anakin and Padmé arrive on the planet but are quickly captured by Jango Fett and sentenced to death, joining Obi-Wan in the Geonosis arena, where they are to be executed. Moments before heading outside, Padame and Anakin confess their love to each other. In the high stands, Count Dooku, Nute Gunray, Rune Haako, Poggle the Lesser, Jango Fett, and Boba Fett watch the start of the planned execution. The trio are forced to battle a reek, a nexu, and an acklay while in chains. During their struggle, Mace Windu arrives with his Jedi strike team, and they battle Dooku's droid army in the arena. Upon seeing so many Jedi in one place, Jango Fett jetpacks down to the arena floor and engages Windu. After a short struggle, Windu kills Jango due to his jetpack malfunctioning. While the Jedi put up a fight, they are eventually overwhelmed by the Droid Army's numerical advantage and appear to be heading into defeat. Yoda unexpectedly arrives with the Republic's new clone army, but only a handful of Jedi have survived. </p>

<p> An even larger battle erupts outside the arena between the Republic's clone army and the Droid Army of the Confederacy of Independent Systems. Nute Gunray and Rune Haako subsequently retreat in Gunray's ship. The Clone Army gains the upper hand, which eventually leads to the Droid Army retreating. Poggle the Lesser entrusts Count Dooku with the early plans for the Death Star. Dooku attempts to escape, but Obi-Wan and Anakin track him to a secret hangar. Anakin immediately disobeys Obi-Wan's orders to take Dooku together and rushes at Dooku, who fires Force lightning at Anakin, tossing him to the side to some rocks and knocking him unconscious temporarily. Obi-Wan circles Dooku cautiously, the latter saying that his powers are far beyond Obi-Wan's and subsequently firing force lightning at him, Obi-Wan blocking it with his lightsaber and saying that he does not think so as Dooku ignites his curved hilted crimson red lightsaber. Obi-Wan rushes at Dooku, engaging him in a lightsaber duel. Unfortunately, while Obi-Wan is powerful, he is no match for Dooku who taunts him that Master Yoda praises Obi-Wan greatly and that he is disappointed in Obi-Wan's lack of skill. The battle lasts around half a minute as Obi-Wan is defeated. Dooku swings his blade high over his head and brings it down as Anakin, who had just awoken from being tossed to the rocks, leaped foward and blocked Dooku's killing strike on Obi-Wan, engaging Dooku, who toyed with him for several minutes before slicing off Anakin's right hand and force pushing it to the ground next to the defeated Obi-Wan. Dooku puts away his lightsaber. Yoda appears just as Dooku is about to escape, and the two masters of the Force go head-to-head in a fierce battle of the force and then a lightsaber duel with Yoda using his acrobatic style and Dooku using his elegant style. Dooku, realizing he can't defeat Yoda, attempts to topple a large pillar on Obi-Wan and Anakin as a distraction. While Yoda uses the Force to divert the pillar, Dooku flees in his solar sailer. Flying to the Works in the Industrial sector of Coruscant, he meets up with his master, Darth Sidious, who is pleased that the war has begun as planned. </p>

<p> In December 2001, it was rumored that members of *NSYNC were filmed as extras in Attack of the Clones.[7] In the following days, the story gained momentum, and it was reported that three band members—Joey Fatone, JC Chasez, and Chris Kirkpatrick[8]—were given parts as Jedi and Naboo citizens[9] by producer Rick McCallum.[10] Lucasfilm then later confirmed the news but denied the rumors that it was done by George Lucas as a favor to his daughters Katie and Amanda, who were fans of the band. Also, Justin Timberlake acknowledged that he and Lance Bass were not involved, but that Joey Fatone's brother Steven Fatone was.[8] Many Star Wars fans reacted negatively to the news, seeing this incident as further evidence of Star Wars "selling out," similar to some Star Wars fans' reactions to Jar Jar Binks or the Ewoks.[11] On January 12, 2002, a Saturday Night Live sketch showed a satirical "first look" at Attack of the Clones, wherein the movie ground to a halt to allow *NSYNC to perform an impromptu musical number entitled "I'm a Jedi Knight in these Jedi Days."[12] Joey Fatone later announced that the singers' parts had been cut from the film because of the negative fan reaction. However, Lucasfilm's Lynne Hale denied this, saying that it was up to Lucas, and that "the final edit of the film is what he determines it will be."[13] </p>

<p> A book version of the movie was written by R. A. Salvatore. It includes scenes created by Salvatore and unique to the novel. The book's prologue describes Anakin, while flying to Ansion with Obi-Wan, having a nightmare of his mother turning into glass and shattering. The following pages relate the events leading up to Shmi Skywalker's capture by Tusken Raiders and Cliegg Lars's loss of his leg while attempting to rescue her. These scenes give a more detailed insight into Shmi's life on the moisture farm and her relationships with Cliegg, Owen, Beru, and C-3PO than can be provided in the film. Interspersed with these events are scenes of Senator Amidala on Naboo prior to her departure for Coruscant to vote on the Military Creation Act. She discusses with her sister the question of retiring from politics to start a family and receives reports about the unrest (briefly mentioned in the film) among spice miners on Naboo's moons. The book also delves more deeply than the film into the father-son relationship of Jango and Boba Fett, making Jango's death more emotionally meaningful. (However, it also has several inaccuracies concerning Jango. For example, the author referred to his Armor as grey, when it is actually white with blue accents.) The first of the Boba Fett series of young adult novels draws upon this material. </p>

<p> Despite the Walt Disney Company's 2012 purchase of Lucasfilm Ltd. and the release rights to all future Star Wars films, Fox was to retain original distribution rights to Star Wars: Episode IV A New Hope, which they co-produced and co-financed, in perpetuity in all media worldwide. Fox was also to retain theatrical, nontheatrical, and home video rights worldwide for the franchise's five subsequent films, which Lucasfilm produced and financed independently, through May 2020, at which time ownership was to transfer to Disney. This complex relationship between Fox and Disney, particularly in regards to Fox's perpetual rights to Episode IV, was to create an obstacle for any future boxed set comprising all nine films.[18] On December 14, 2017, The Walt Disney Company announced that it was acquiring most of Fox's parent company, 21st Century Fox, including the film studio and all distribution rights to A New Hope.[19] On March 20, 2019, the deal was officially completed.[20] On April 12, 2019, a Blu-ray box set containing the nine main instalments of the Star Wars saga remastered in 4K was reportedly announced to be in development for a 2020 release.[21] </p>

<p> The movie starts with an opening crawl explaining that ten years following the invasion of Naboo by the Trade Federation, the Galactic Republic is in turmoil. Anakin Skywalker is now an apprentice to Obi-Wan Kenobi and the former Jedi Knight Count Dooku has organized a Separatist movement against the Republic, and the Galactic Senate is debating a plan to create an army for the Republic to assist the Jedi against the Separatist threat. Senator Padmé Amidala, the former queen of Naboo, returns to Coruscant to vote. Upon her arrival, she escapes an assassination attempt, and Supreme Chancellor Palpatine assigns Obi-Wan and Anakin to protect her. Obi-Wan and Anakin subdue the assassin, Zam Wessell, during another assassination attempt. However, before she can give them any information, the assassin is killed by her employer with a poisonous dart. Obi-Wan learns that the dart was manufactured on the remote ocean planet of Kamino, and is assigned to investigate, while Anakin is assigned to escort Padmé back to her home planet of Naboo, where he and Padmé fall in love. In investigating Kamino, Obi-Wan discovers that it has been removed from the navigation maps of the Jedi archives. Yoda reveals that such a thing could only have been done by a Jedi, suggesting that a conspiracy is afoot. </p>

<p> Obi-Wan heads to Kamino, where he discovers that an army of clone troopers is being secretly produced for the Republic, using a bounty hunter named Jango Fett as their genetic template. Realizing that Jango is the assassin's employer, Obi-Wan tracks Jango and his son Boba to Geonosis, a rocky planet where a new droid army is being created. Meanwhile, on Naboo, Anakin becomes troubled by premonitions of his mother Shmi in pain. Against Obi-Wan's order, Anakin and Padmé travel to Tatooine. After meeting his new stepfather Cliegg Lars, as well as his stepbrother Owen, Anakin realizes that Shmi was kidnapped by Tusken Raiders some weeks earlier. Anakin arrives at the tribe's campsite to rescue Shmi, only to discover too late that his mother was tortured to death. After Anakin kills everyone at the campsite, he returns with Shmi's body and reveals his crime to Padmé, who comforts him. </p>

<p> Having learned that Count Dooku authorized the assassination attempt on Padmé and that the Separatists are developing a new battle droid army, Obi-Wan relays this information via hologram to Anakin, who transmits it to the Jedi Council. However, Obi-Wan is captured by Dooku mid-transmission. Dooku unsuccessfully attempts to make an ally of Obi-Wan, and reveals to him that the Republic is being secretly controlled by a Sith Lord named Darth Sidious. While Anakin and Padmé head to Geonosis to rescue Obi-Wan, Palpatine is granted emergency powers to organize the clone army and send them into battle. Shortly after arriving on Geonosis, Anakin and Padmé are captured by Jango and ordered to be publicly executed along with Obi-Wan. Anakin and Padmé profess their love before being led into a large gladiatorial arena where they and Obi-Wan are pitted against gigantic beasts. However, Mace Windu and a team of Jedi appear and lead a strong defense against the beasts and the Separatists. During the almighty battle that follows, Windu kills Jango Fett but then the Jedi find themselves outnumbered by the Separatists' droid army. As Dooku demands their surrender, Yoda arrives with reinforcements- the clone army. </p>

<p> Principal photography occurred between June 26, 2000 and September 20, 2000 at 20th Century Fox Studios in Australia. Location shooting took place in the Tunisian desert, at the Plaza de España in Seville, Spain, in Italy at the Villa del Balbianello on Lake Como, and in the former royal Palace of Caserta. At his own personal request, Samuel L. Jackson's character Mace Windu received a lightsaber that emitted an amethyst glow, as opposed to traditional blue and green for "good guys" and red for "bad guys."[9] Reshoots were performed in March 2001. During this time, a new action sequence was developed featuring the droid factory after Lucas had decided that the film lacked a quick enough pace in the corresponding time-frame. The sequence's previsualization was rushed, and the live-action footage was shot within four and a half hours.[10] Because of Lucas' method of creating shots through various departments and sources that are sometimes miles and years apart from each other, Attack of the Clones became the first film ever to be produced through what Rick McCallum called "virtual filmmaking."[10] </p>

<p> Like The Phantom Menace, Attack of the Clones furthered technological development, effectively moving Hollywood into the "digital age" with the use of the HDW-F900, developed by Sony and Panavision, a digital camera using an HD digital 24-frame system. This spawned controversy over the benefits and disadvantages of digital cinematography that continues as more filmmakers "convert" to digital filmmaking while many filmmakers oppose it. In contrast to previous installments, for which scenes were shot in the Tunisian desert in temperatures up to 125 °F (51 °C), the camera would still run without complications. Lucas had stated that he wished to film The Phantom Menace on this format but Sony was unable to build the cameras quickly enough.[11] In 2002, Attack of the Clones became the third film to be released that was shot entirely on a 24p digital camera (preceded by 2001's Jackpot and Vidocq).[12] Despite Lucas' efforts to persuade movie theaters to switch to digital projectors for viewing of Episode II, few theaters did.[13] </p>

<p> The film relied almost solely on digital animatics as opposed to storyboards in order to previsualize sequences for editing early on in the film's production. While Lucas had used other ways of producing motion-based storyboards in the past, after The Phantom Menace the decision was made to take advantage of the growing digital technology.[10] The process began with Ben Burtt's creation of what the department dubbed as "videomatics", so called because they were shot on a household videocamera. In these videomatics, production assistants and relatives of the department workers acted out scenes in front of greenscreen. Using computer-generated imagery (CGI), the previsualization department later filled in the green screen with rough background footage. Burtt then cut together this footage and sent it off to Lucas for changes and approval. The result was a rough example of what the final product was intended to be. The previsualization department then created a finer version of the videomatic by creating an animatic, in which the videomatic actors, props, and sets were replaced by digital counterparts to give a more precise, but still rough, look at what would eventually be seen. The animatic was later brought on set and shown to the actors so that they could understand the concept of the scene they were filming in the midst of large amount of bluescreen used. Unlike most of the action sequences, the Battle of Geonosis was not storyboarded or created through videomatics but was sent straight to animatics after the department received a small vague page on the sequence. The intent was to create a number of small events that would be edited together for pacing inside the finished film. The animatics department was given a free hand regarding events to be created within the animatic; Lucas only asked for good action shots that he could choose from and approve later.[10] </p>

<p> In addition to introducing the digital camera, Attack of the Clones emphasized "digital doubles" as computer-generated models that doubled for actors, in the same way that traditional stunt doubles did. It also furthered the authenticity of computer-generated characters by introducing a new, completely CGI-created version of the character Yoda. Rob Coleman and John Knoll prepared two tests featuring a CGI-animated Yoda using audio from The Empire Strikes Back. Yoda's appearance in Episode V also served as the reference point for the creation of the CGI Yoda; Lucas repeatedly stated to the animation department that "the trick" to the animation of the CGI Yoda was to make him like the puppet from which he was based, in order to maintain a flow of continuity. Frank Oz (voice and puppeteer for Yoda in the original trilogy and The Phantom Menace) was consulted; his main piece of advice was that Yoda should look extremely old, sore, and frigid.[14] Coleman later explained the process of making the digital Yoda like the puppet version, by saying, "When Frank [Oz] would move the head, the ears would jiggle. If we hadn't put that in, it wouldn't look like Yoda."[15] Because of the acrobatics of the lightsaber fight between Count Dooku and Yoda, the 78-year-old Christopher Lee relied on a stunt double to perform the most demanding scenes instead. Lee's face was superimposed onto the double's body in all shots other than closeups, which he performed himself. Lucas often called the duel crucial to the animation department, as it had such potential to be humorous rather than dramatic.[14] </p>

<p> Lucas has noted that Palpatine's rise to power is very similar to that of Adolf Hitler in Nazi Germany; as Chancellor of Germany, the latter was granted "emergency powers", as is Palpatine.[19] Comparisons have been made to Octavian – who became Augustus, the first emperor of Rome – and to Napoleon Bonaparte, who rose to power in France from 1796 to 1799. Octavian was responsible for the deaths of hundreds of political opponents well before he was granted tribunician powers; Bonaparte was appointed First Consul for life (and later Emperor) by the French Consulate after a failed attempt on his life and the subsequent coup of 18 Brumaire in 1799.[20] Some have drawn parallels to the American Civil War, likening the Separatists to the Confederate States of America; the official name of the Separatist group is the "Confederacy of Independent Systems". The name of the government Army, the "Grand Army of the Republic", is the same in both Star Wars and the American Civil War, and both Palpatine and President Abraham Lincoln took extensive war powers and suspended many civil rights.[20] </p>

<p> The prequel trilogy films often refer to the original trilogy in order to help connect the films together. Lucas has often referred to the films as a long poem that rhymes.[21] Such examples include the now-famous line of "I have a bad feeling about this," a phrase used in each film, and battles, namely lightsaber duels, that almost always occur over a pit. As with Attack of the Clones, The Empire Strikes Back was the middle film in a trilogy; therefore, of the original trilogy films, The Empire Strikes Back is the object of the most references in Attack of the Clones. In both films, an asteroid field is the backdrop of a major star battle in the middle of the film. Obi-Wan escapes Jango Fett by attaching his spacecraft to an asteroid in order to disappear from the enemy sensors; Han Solo uses a similar tactic by attaching the Millennium Falcon to a Star Destroyer in The Empire Strikes Back. As a retcon, John Knoll confirms on the film's DVD commentary that Boba Fett, who would later catch Solo in the act in The Empire Strikes Back, "learned his lesson" from the events of Attack of the Clones.[19] In another scene, Obi-Wan asks Anakin, "Why do I get the feeling you're going to be the death of me?" This is an allusion to A New Hope where Anakin, as Darth Vader, kills Obi-Wan aboard the Death Star. Also, Count Dooku cuts off Anakin's arm, similar to when Darth Vader cut off Luke Skywalker's hand in The Empire Strikes Back. </p>

<p> The film grossed $310,676,740 in North America and $338,721,588 overseas for a worldwide total of $649,398,328. Though a huge financial success, it was nevertheless overshadowed by the even greater box-office success of The Phantom Menace three years earlier.[1] It was not the top grossing film of the year, either in North America (where it finished in third place) or worldwide (where it was fourth), the first time that a Star Wars film did not have this distinction. In North America it was outgrossed by Spider-Man and The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers, both of which enjoyed a more favorable critical reception as well. Worldwide, it was also outgrossed by Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, though Attack of the Clones performed better than The Chamber of Secrets in North America. Adjusted for inflation, Attack of the Clones is the lowest-performing live-action Star Wars film at the North American box office, though is still in the Top 100 highest grossing films of all time when adjusted for inflation. It was also the first Star Wars film, in theatrical order, not to be the highest-grossing film of the year of its release.[42] </p>

<p> Meanwhile, Palpatine tempts Anakin with the dark side of the Force, promising that it can save Padmé. Anakin deduces that Palpatine is the Sith Lord behind the Clone Wars[a] and reports his treachery to Mace Windu, who confronts and subdues Palpatine, leaving the latter disfigured. Desperate to save Padmé, Anakin prevents Windu from killing Palpatine by slicing off his right hand. Palpatine then sends Windu falling to his death. Despite being horrified by his actions, Anakin pledges himself to the Sith, and Palpatine knights him as Darth Vader. Palpatine issues Order 66, which commands the clone troopers to kill their commanding Jedi generals across the galaxy, while Vader and a battalion of clone troopers kill the remaining Jedi in the Jedi Temple. Vader then travels to Mustafar to assassinate the Separatist leaders, while Palpatine declares himself Emperor before the Galactic Senate, transforming the Republic into the Galactic Empire. He denounces the Jedi as traitors. </p>

<p> George Lucas said he conceived the Star Wars saga's story in the form of a plot outline in 1973. However, he later clarified that, at the time of the saga's conception, he had not fully realized the details—only major plot points.[17] The film's climactic duel has its basis in the Return of the Jedi novelization, in which Obi-Wan recounts his battle with Vader that ended with the latter falling "into a molten pit".[18] Lucas began working on the screenplay for Episode III before the previous film, Attack of the Clones, was released, proposing to concept artists that the film would open with a montage of seven battles on seven planets.[19] In The Secret History of Star Wars, Michael Kaminski surmises that Lucas found flaws with Anakin's fall to the dark side and radically reorganized the plot. For example, instead of opening the film with a montage of Clone War battles, Lucas decided to focus on Anakin, ending the first act with him killing Count Dooku, an action that signals his turn to the dark side.[20] </p>

<p> For the Kashyyyk environment, the art department turned to the Star Wars Holiday Special for inspiration.[26] Over a period of months, Lucas would approve hundreds of designs that would eventually appear in the film. He would later rewrite entire scenes and action sequences to correspond to certain designs he had chosen.[25] The designs were then shipped to the pre-visualization department to create moving CGI versions known as animatics. Ben Burtt would edit these scenes with Lucas in order to pre-visualize what the film would look like before the scenes were filmed.[25] The pre-visualization footage featured a basic raw CGI environment with equally unprocessed character models performing a scene, typically for action sequences. Steven Spielberg was brought in as a "guest director" for the film's climax, overseeing the pre-visualization of an unused version of the Utapau chase scene[27] and making art-design suggestions for the Order 66 assassinations as well as the Mustafar duel.[28][29][f] The pre-visualization and art department designs were sent to the production department to begin building sets, props and costumes.[25] </p>

<p> Although the first scene filmed was the final scene to appear in the film (shot during the filming of Attack of the Clones in 2000),[30][g] the first bulk of principal photography on the film occurred from June 30, 2003, to September 17, 2003, with additional photography at Shepperton Studios in Surrey and Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire from August 2004 to January 31, 2005.[25] The initial filming took place on sound stages at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney, although practical environments were shot as background footage later to be composited into the film. These included the limestone mountains depicting Kashyyyk, which were filmed in Phuket, Thailand. The production company was also fortunate enough to be shooting at the same time that Mount Etna erupted in Italy. Camera crews were sent to the location to shoot several angles of the volcano that were later spliced into the background of the animatics and the final film version of the planet Mustafar.[25] </p>

<p> The first trailer for Revenge of the Sith was released in theaters on November 5, 2004, with the premiere of The Incredibles.[54] It was also attached to the screenings of The Polar Express, National Treasure, Alexander, Ocean's Twelve, Meet the Fockers and Flight of the Phoenix, among other films.[55] At the same time, the trailer became available on the Internet.[55] Just four months later, another Revenge of the Sith trailer was unveiled on March 10, 2005, debuting on Fox Network with The O.C.'s "The Mallpisode" during the second season (Lucas himself would appear in a later episode).[56][57] The next day on March 11, the trailer then premiered in theaters with the theatrical release of Robots.[58][57] On March 14, it would be released on the official Star Wars website.[57] Prior to this, bootleg copies of the trailer were leaked everywhere, as the official trailer was in the subscriber section.[59] The trailers were even attached to the DVD releases of Star Wars: Clone Wars.[60] Three days later on March 17, 2005, George Lucas revealed a preview of the film at the ShoWest Convention in Las Vegas, saying "It's not like the old Star Wars. This one's a little bit emotional. We like to describe it as Titanic in space. It's a tearjerker."[61] </p>

<p> To promote the release of Revenge of the Sith, Burger King began selling cups and toys themed to the film for their kids meals at their restaurants.[62] However, just like what McDonald's did to the Happy Meal promotion for Batman Returns in 1992, officials urged to recall the kids meal toys due to the film's PG-13 rating.[63] While Cingular Wireless released commercials showing Chewbacca growling into a microphone for ringtones, Hasbro released a Darth Vader variation of Mr. Potato Head called "Darth Tater" across retail stores.[64] Kellogg's would promote the film by premiering a new Star Wars cereal, which featured marshmallows shaped like droids and lightsabers.[65] Also released were Lava Berry Explosion Pop-Tarts, as well as Keebler Lava Stripes cookies, a variation of the Fudge Stripes cookies.[66] M&M's debuted a new chocolate flavor that came in either the Darth Mix and Jedi Mix, both of which contained multi-colored candies.[67] Meanwhile, 7-Eleven rolled out a new Slurpee flavor to help coincide with the release of Revenge of the Sith.[68] Known as the Darth Dew Slurpee, it featured grape-flavored Mountain Dew and was served in cups with Darth Vader's helmet and 3D images.[68] Additionally, Pepsi would serve as a promotional partner for the film.[69] Frito-Lay even released twisted Cheetos that had Darth Vader Dark and Yoda Green colors.[70] </p>

<p> Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith charity premieres took place in Seattle, Los Angeles, Chicago, Washington D.C., Boston, Denver, Atlanta, San Francisco, and Miami on Thursday, May 12, 2005;[71] and on May 13, 2005, there were two additional charity premiere screenings in George Lucas's hometown of Modesto, California. The official premiere was at the 2005 Cannes Film Festival (out of competition) on May 16.[72] Its theatrical release in most other countries took place on May 19 to coincide with the 1999 release of The Phantom Menace (the 1977 release of A New Hope and the 1983 release of Return of the Jedi were also released on the same day and month, six years apart). The global outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas claimed one week before the premiere that it may have cost the U.S. economy approximately US$627 million in lost productivity because of employees who took a day off or reported in sick.[73] Grauman's Chinese Theatre, a traditional venue for the Star Wars films, did not show it. However, a line of people stood there for more than a month hoping to convince someone to change this.[74] Most of them took advantage of an offer to see the film at a nearby cinema, ArcLight Cinemas (formerly the "Cinerama Dome").[75] On May 16, the Empire Cinema in London's Leicester Square hosted a day-long Star Wars marathon showing of all six films; an army of Imperial stormtroopers "guarded" the area, and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra gave a free concert of Star Wars music.[76] </p>

<p> Most critics have considered the film to be the best of the prequel trilogy.[107] A. O. Scott of The New York Times concluded that it was "the best of the four episodes Mr. Lucas has directed", and equal to The Empire Strikes Back as "the richest and most challenging movie in the cycle".[108] J.R. Jones, a Chicago Reader critic who disliked The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones, gave the film a positive review, saying that it had a "relatively thoughtful story".[109] Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film a scoring of two out of four stars, saying, "Drink the Kool-Aid. Wear blinders. Cover your ears. Because that's the only way you can totally enjoy Revenge of the Sith".[110] David Sterritt of The Christian Science Monitor gave it a B and said, "On the action-adventure level, it's a sure-fire delight for fans, a punchy entertainment for average sci-fi buffs, and a colorful rocket-ride for moviegoers who just want a good time on Saturday night".[111] Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three-and-a-half out of four stars, writing "If [Lucas] got bogged down in solemnity and theory in Episode II: Attack of the Clones, the Force is in a jollier mood this time, and Revenge of the Sith is a great entertainment", but he noted that "the dialogue throughout the movie is once again its weakest point".[112] Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader gave it a score of three out of four, saying, "Lucas has woven into the action and effects a relatively thoughtful story about a young man meant for greatness but corrupted by his own fear and confusion, a story more Shakespearean than Arthurian".[113] </p>

<p> With only the May 19 earnings, the film broke four box office records: midnight screenings gross (previously held by The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King, $8 million), opening day gross (Spider-Man 2, with $40.4 million), single day gross (Shrek 2 with $44.8 million) and Thursday gross (The Matrix Reloaded with $37.5 million).[126] Its single day and opening day gross records were later surpassed by Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest on July 7, 2006, when that movie grossed $55.5 million on its opening day,[128] and its midnight screening gross was broken by The Dark Knight on July 18, 2008, with $18.5 million.[129] Overall, Revenge of the Sith would go on to generate a total of $108.4 million during its three-day opening weekend,[130] making it the second-highest of all time, after Spider-Man.[131] It held the record for having the biggest opening weekend for any 20th Century Fox film for a decade until it was taken by Deadpool in 2016.[132] The year prior, Minions had already surpassed Revenge of the Sith for having the largest opening weekend for a prequel.[133] </p>

<p> According to box office analysis sites, the film set American records for highest gross in a given number of days for each of its first 12 days of release except for the seventh and eighth, where the record is narrowly held by Spider-Man 2. Within three days, Revenge of the Sith surpassed Spider-Man for having the highest three-day gross of any film, scoring a total of $124.7 million.[134] Upon opening, the film would reach the number one spot at the box office, beating out Monster-in-Law and Kicking & Screaming.[131] On its fifth day, it became the highest-grossing film of 2005, surpassing Hitch ($177.6 million). The film earned $158.5 million in its first four-day period, surpassing the previous four-day record held by The Matrix Reloaded ($134.3 million), and joining the latter film, Spider-Man, and Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire as one of the only four films to make $100 million in their first three days. In eight days, it reached the $200 million mark (a record tied with Spider-Man 2) and by its 17th day, the film had passed $300 million (surpassing the record of 18 days of Shrek 2). It was eventually the third-fastest film (after Shrek 2 and Spider-Man) to reach $350 million.[2] Revenge of the Sith earned a total of $55.2 million during its second weekend, making it the fourth-highest-grossing second weekend of all time, behind Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone, Spider-Man and Shrek 2. The film then earned $70 million in just four days, becoming the seventh-highest Memorial Day weekend gross of any film, trailing only behind Shrek 2, The Lost World: Jurassic Park, The Day After Tomorrow, Bruce Almighty, Pearl Harbor and Mission: Impossible 2.[135] It topped the domestic box office for a total of two consecutive weekends before being overtaken by Madagascar and The Longest Yard (which were in their second weekend) in its third weekend, but it still outgrossed Cinderella Man, The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants and Lords of Dogtown.[136] </p>

<p> The 2008 animated film and subsequent television series fill the three-year gap between the events of Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith. A number of plot threads initially developed for inclusion in Revenge of the Sith were instead incorporated into The Clone Wars. These include Boba Fett's revenge plot against Mace Windu for his father Jango's death, and the solving of the mystery behind deceased Jedi Master Sifo-Dyas which was introduced in Attack of the Clones. The final four episodes of the series take place concurrently with Revenge of the Sith. Several scenes from the film were recreated and expanded for these episodes in order to showcase the whereabouts of Anakin's former Padawan Ahsoka Tano during the events of the film, while also showing Anakin and Obi-Wan's whereabouts just prior to the film's opening scene. While Ahsoka was a major character in The Clone Wars, she is not referenced in Revenge of the Sith as the character had not yet been created at the time that the film was written.[155] </p>

<p> Upon return, Obi-Wan is promoted to Jedi Master, except Anakin was denied. Anakin is reunited with his wife, Padmé Amidala, who tells him that she is pregnant. Despite Padmé's worries over their secret marriage, Anakin is overjoyed at this news, and the couple make plans to raise their child. However, Anakin is troubled by visions of Padmé dying in childbirth, visions similar to those he had of his mother just before she died. Later, Obi-Wan privately tells Anakin that the Council wants him to spy on the Chancellor because they believe him to be corrupt. Anakin resents this as the Chancellor is like a mentor to him. As the Chancellor's bodyguard, Anakin slowly builds a close friendship with Palpatine, who subtly manipulates Anakin in their discussions, making him distrust the Jedi. Palpatine claims to know of an ability to prevent death (from his late master Darth Plagueis). This intrigues Anakin, who is willing to do anything to keep his visions from coming true once again. </p>

<p> Obi-Wan is sent to Utapau, where he engages and kills General Grievous. Meanwhile, back on Coruscant, Palpatine reveals himself to Anakin as the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, who has been controlling the Republic and the Separatist movement. Anakin leaves to expose him to the Jedi Council. Mace Windu arrives at the Chancellor's office shortly thereafter and quickly subdues Sidious through a lightsaber duel. Just as Anakin arrives, Windu is about to slay Sidious and avenge the three fallen Jedi who came to help him. Windu deflects Sidious' Force Lighting that disfigures him. This prompts Anakin to disarm Windu, as he believes that the Chancellor holds the only way to save his wife. Windu is consumed by Sidious' torrents of Force Lightning, forcing him out a window and murdering him. Darth Sidious takes Anakin as his Sith apprentice and bequeath him the Sith name Darth Vader. He then orders Vader to kill all Jedi within the Jedi Temple. Sidious orders clone troopers across the galaxy to turn against their Jedi Generals by enacting a pre-programmed directive called Order 66. Numerous Jedi across the galaxy are seen being exterminated, though both Yoda and Obi-Wan barely manage to survive. Darth Vader begins a killing spree in the Jedi Temple. Afterward, he goes to Padmé and tells her the Jedi have attempted to take over the Republic and leaves for planet Mustafar, where he slaughters the Separatist leaders. After he informs Darth Sidious that he has achieved this objective, Sidious tells Vader to send a message to the Trade Federation ships to shut down all battle droid military units. Senator Bail Organa rescues Obi-Wan and Yoda, and brings them to the Jedi Temple before heading to the Senate building. Palpatine convinces the Senate of a Jedi plot to overthrow the Republic. As a result, he announces that the Republic will be reorganized into the Galactic Empire. In the Jedi Temple, Obi-Wan and Yoda reconfigure a coded message to warn all surviving Jedi to stay away. Obi-Wan looks into the security recordings and sees Anakin carrying out the orders of Darth Sidious and kneeling to him afterward. Though he initially refuses, Obi-Wan eventually agrees to find and kill Vader. Obi-Wan then meets with Padmé, who cannot accept his claims about Anakin's fall to the dark side. When she departs for Mustafar, Obi-Wan secretly stows away on board. </p>

<p> When the couple are reunited, Padmé pleads with Anakin to leave public life with her, but he declines - believing that he can overthrow Palpatine so that he and Padme can rule the galaxy together. Vader sees Obi-Wan emerge from Padmé's ship, and suspects her of betraying him. Enraged, he uses the Force to choke Padmé into unconsciousness. Obi-Wan and Vader break into a vicious lightsaber duel. The duel brings them out of the facility to unprotected areas of the volcano planet. Obi-Wan eventually gains the advantage of higher ground, but when Vader attempts to attack again, Obi-Wan slices off both of his legs and his left arm in two swift cuts. Vader tumbles down the embankment and rolls to a stop at the edge of the lava. Eyes gleaming yellow, he shouts, " I HATE YOU!" He catches on fire, sustaining near-fatal third-degree burns and severe lung damage. Obi-Wan replies "you were my brother Anakin, I loved you." He leaves Mustafar with the heartbroken Padmé and Anakin's lightsaber. Later, Sidious arrives at Mustafar and rescues Vader from the brink of death. </p>

<p> Padmé is given medical assistance, and although she is physically intact, her will to live is gone. However, the medical droids manage to save her babies—she delivers twins, a boy and a girl. Just before she dies, Padmé gives them the names Luke and Leia and swears to Obi-Wan that there is still good in Anakin. On Coruscant, Vader's missing limbs and damaged body parts are replaced by cybernetic prostheses and implants. Vader is put into a full suit of black armor and is sealed in a respirator mask, which will allow him to survive his injuries. When Vader asks Sidious about Padmé's condition, he tells Vader that, in his anger, Vader himself killed Padmé. Vader unleashes a furious scream of mournful rage that destroys droids and equipment throughout the room while Sidious looks on with an evil grin. Aboard the Sundered Heart, Obi-Wan, Yoda, and Bail Organa agree to keep the children hidden and separated. Obi-Wan and Yoda will watch and wait until the time is ready for the Skywalker children to do their part in the battle against the Sith. R2-D2 and C-3PO are taken aboard a ship to be looked after. Before Yoda goes in self-exiled on Dagobah, he teaches Obi-Wan how to make contact with Qui-Gon Jinn's spirit. Leia is brought to Alderaan to live with the Queen and Bail Organa as they had always wanted a daughter, and Luke is brought to Tatooine to live with Owen and Beru Lars his maternal Aunt and Uncle. The film concludes with Owen and Beru holding Luke while staring out over the desert at Tatooine's twin suns, leading to A New Hope. </p>

<p> After the earliest draft of the screenplay was submitted, the art department began designing the various ways that each element could appear on screen. For the Kashyyyk environment, the art department turned to The Star Wars Holiday Special for inspiration.[2] Over a period of months, Lucas would approve hundreds of designs that would eventually appear in the film. He would later rewrite entire scenes and action sequences to correspond to certain designs he had chosen.[3] The designs were then shipped to "pre-visualization" to create moving CGI versions known as "animatics". Ben Burtt would edit these scenes with Lucas in order to pre-visualize what the film would look like before the scenes were even filmed.[3] The pre-visualization footage featured a basic raw CGI environment with equally unprocessed CGI characters performing a scene (typically an action sequence). Steven Spielberg was also allowed to assist both the art and pre-visualization department's designs for several action sequences in Revenge of the Sith.[3] Later, the pre-visualization and art department designs were sent to the production department to begin "bringing the film out of the concept phase"[3] by building the various sets, props and costumes. To determine the required sets, Lucas analyzed each scene with the staff to see which moments the actors would come in most contact with the set, warranting the set to be constructed. </p>

<p> Revenge of the Sith is the first and only Star Wars film to receive a PG-13 rating from the MPAA, officially for "sci-fi violence and some intense images", namely for the scene in which Darth Vader is set aflame. Some critics, including Roger Ebert and Richard Roeper, later responded that the film could be handled by children as long as they had parental guidance, hence a PG rating.[15] At the same time, Lucas had stated months before the MPAA's decision that he felt the film should receive a PG-13 rating, because of Anakin's final moments and the content of the film being the darkest and most emotional of all six films.[16] All previously released films in the series were rated PG. The PG-13 rating had not existed when the films in the original trilogy were released; however, the films in the original trilogy were later re-submitted to the MPAA due to changes in the re-released versions and once again received PG rating. When Revenge of the Sith was released in Canada, it was given a PG rating in most provinces, excluding Quebec, where it was rated G. In Great Britain it received a "12A" rating (equivalent to the American "PG-13" rating). </p>

<p> Other criticisms included previously raised issues with the prequels: "wooden" acting, overuse of flashy and colorful computer-generated special effects, and attempts to be both childish and mature at the same time. It is often said the film contains a number of plot holes, although this claim is widely disputed and debated by fans.[17] Though many critics and fans saw it as one of the best of the series, or at least, the strongest of the three prequels, others saw it as more or less on par with The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones. Some neoconservatives criticized the film, claiming it has a liberal bias and is a "weak" commentary on the U.S. Bush Administration and the U.S./Iraqi war. Some websites went as far as to propose a boycott of the film. However, Lucas defended the film, stating that the film's storyline was written during the Vietnam War, and was influenced by it instead. Lucas did note however that "The parallels between Vietnam and what we're doing in Iraq now are unbelievable."[18] However, a letter posted at film critic Roger Ebert's website claims that the film was the most conservative film of 2005.[19] </p>

<p> Palpatine issues an order for the clone troopers to kill their Jedi commanders, and dispatches Vader and a legion of clones to kill everyone in the Jedi Temple; however, Obi-Wan (having killed Grievous on Utapau) and Yoda survive. Vader then kills the remaining Separatist leaders hiding on the volcanic planet Mustafar, while Palpatine addresses the Senate and reforms the Republic as the Galactic Empire, declaring himself Emperor. On Coruscant, Obi-Wan and Yoda return to the Jedi Temple to discover Anakin's treachery. Concerned by Obi-Wan's reasoning that Anakin has turned to the dark side, Padmé travels to Mustafar to confront him, while Obi-Wan stows aboard her ship. When Vader discovers Obi-Wan, he accuses Padmé of betrayal and uses the Force to choke her into unconsciousness. Obi-Wan battles and dismembers Vader, who is significantly burned by a volcanic river. Back on Coruscant, Yoda confronts Palpatine, but retreats after their duel reaches a stalemate. </p>

<p> Revenge of the Sith was released in theaters on Thursday, May 19, 2005 (the same day that the first episode of the prequel trilogy The Phantom Menace was released in 1999), and premiered (out of competition) on the 2005 Cannes Festival May 15. The film was generally positively received by critics, especially in comparison to the two previous prequels. It broke several box office records in its opening week and went on to earn over US $800 million worldwide, making it the second highest-grossing movie of 2005 behind Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. It is the second Star Wars film which used a high-definition digital 24 frame system for most of the movie's live-action scenes. The film was re-released in the Blu-ray format in September of 2011. On November 12, 2019, the film was included with the launch of Disney+. It will also be rereleased in 2025 for the 20th aniversery. </p>

<p> As the Separatist Droid Army attempts to escape the Galactic capital, a massive space battle erupts, into which race Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi and his former padawan, now Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker, leading a mission to rescue the Chancellor. The Jedi fight through the Separatist armada. In the process, Obi-Wan's interceptor is damaged by buzz droids and his astromech, R4-P17, is destroyed. Anakin attempts to shoot the droids off, though succeeds only in blasting apart the wing of his former Master's vessel. Obi-Wan tells Anakin to hold his fire as he's not helping. Anakin agrees it was a bad idea. Obi-Wan tells Anakin to go on and rescue the Chancellor, but Anakin says he won't leave without Obi-Wan. Anakin uses one of his fighter wings to knock some of the buzz droids off Obi-Wan's fighter, but one manages to crawl onto Anakin's ship although it is quickly disabled by R2-D2. As they approach Grievous's flagship, the Invisible Hand, Obi-Wan reminds Anakin their shields are still up, so Anakin breaks formation and attacks a shield generator, knocking out the shields on the docking bay of the ship. The destruction of it activates the ship' emergency breach door, which quickly begins closing. The two Jedi crash-land just before the door slams closed. </p>

<p> Grievous then sends a pair of his powerful IG-100 MagnaGuard droids after the Jedi. Obi-Wan quickly beheads the first MagnaGuard with his blade, but the droid continues the fight, forcing Obi-Wan to slice the droid warrior apart before it deactivates. Anakin finishes off the second MagnaGuard and destroys the battle droids attempting to drag Palpatine from the bridge. The Jedi close in on Grievous, though the wily General smashes a window with his fallen guard's electrostaff, and is swept outside. Using a tow cable, Grievous latches himself to the ship and heads for the escape pods. Launching all other escape capsules, Grievous speeds for the safety of a Trade Federation Lucrehulk-class battleship. Once again, the flagship begins to descend in free fall into Coruscant, though due to its extensive damage taken from its broadside cannon fight with the Guarlara and entering Coruscant' atmosphere, the ships hangar bay begins to weaken. After extending the ship's drag flaps, the hangar gives out and breaks off from the rest of the ship, sending them into a faster freefall. With the aid of a few emergency firespeeders they land, hitting a control tower along on one of Coruscant's industrial landing platforms. </p>

<p> At the Galaxies Opera House in the Uscru District, Anakin joins Palpatine in watching the Mon Calamari Aquatic Ballet performing Squid Lake. Palpatine tells Anakin Clone Intelligence has located General Grievous hiding in the Utapau system. Anakin is delighted by this news, as Grievous's capture will accelerate the war's end. Palpatine remarks that he'd question the competence of the Jedi Council if Anakin was not sent on the mission. Inviting Anakin to join him, Palpatine dismisses his aides: once they are gone, Palpatine seduces Anakin to the dark side. He also tells Anakin that the Jedi Order wishes to overthrow the Republic and that if he has suspected it, Anakin must surely have sensed it. Anakin confirms that the Jedi don't trust him, a fact that Palpatine expands to include the Senate, the Republic, and democracy as a whole. Anakin tells Palpatine that his trust in the Jedi has been shaken and Palpatine deduces Anakin's distaste for the Council's mission to spy on the Chancellor. Palpatine takes Anakin back to some of the early political lessons Palpatine tried to teach him, about how all those who gain power are afraid to lose it and that includes the Jedi. Anakin tries to defend the Jedi by saying they use their powers for good, but Palpatine argues good is only a point of view, noting that in almost every conceivable manner, including a quest for greater power, the Sith and the Jedi are exactly alike. Anakin disagrees, remarking that the Sith depend on passion for strength, thinking only of themselves, whereas the Jedi are selfless, thinking only of others. </p>

<p> After a brief pause in their conversation, Palpatine makes a remark about the tragedy of Darth Plagueis the Wise. Palpatine describes Darth Plagueis as a Dark Lord of the Sith so powerful and wise that he could use the Force to influence the midi-chlorians to create life. Not only this, but having such power and knowledge of the dark side, Plagueis could use thistle ability to save people he cared about from death, a statement which gets Anakin's attention (which was Palpatine's desire) and Palpatine describes the dark side of the Force as a pathway to many abilities considered by some to be unnatural. When Anakin asks what happened to Darth Plagueis, Palpatine concludes that Plagueis became so powerful that all he feared was losing his power, which he eventually did. Unfortunately for Plagueis, he taught his apprentice, who happened to be Darth Sidious, all he knew: after he had, his apprentice killed him in his sleep. Palpatine notes the irony of how Plagueis could keep others from dying, but not himself. When Anakin asks if it is possible to learn the power to stop death, Palpatine simply replies, "Not from a Jedi," further alienating Anakin from the Jedi Order. </p>

<p> Anakin walks Obi-Wan to a Jedi cruiser before he leaves. Anakin still believes he'd be needed on Utapau, and while Obi-Wan agrees, he also notes it might just be a wild Bantha chase. Anakin stops Obi-Wan and tells him that he knows he's disappointed Obi-Wan and that he's not been acting very grateful for the training he received. Anakin tells him he's just been so frustrated with the Council lately, but that he does apologize. Obi-Wan calls Anakin strong and wise and tells Anakin he's very proud of him and while Obi-Wan trained him since Anakin was a boy, he calls Anakin a far greater Jedi than Obi-Wan could hope to be. But Obi-Wan encourages Anakin to be patient and that it won't be long before the Council makes Anakin a Jedi Master. The two bid each other farewell and Obi-Wan leaves for Utapau. Little do they know that this is the last time they will see or speak to each other as fellow Jedi and friends. </p>

<p> Obi-Wan arrives in Pau City on Utapau, and begins his search for General Grievous, riding a varactyl named Boga. He finds Grievous on the Tenth Level. After Obi-Wan dispatches the droids around Grievous, the two engage in single combat. Grievous's arms split in half, allowing him to use four lightsabers at once. Obi-Wan quickly cuts off the lower halves of the General's hands, helping to even out the odds a little. During the battle, the Third Systems Army arrives under the command of CC-2224 "Cody." Obi-Wan manages to catch Grievous off guard and uses the Force to push the fiendish droid general into the ceiling. Grievous drops his remaining two lightsabers and attempts to flee on his wheel bike, while Obi-Wan pursues on Boga. During the chase, Obi-Wan drops his lightsaber, which Commander Cody happens to find during the massive battle against the droids. </p>

<p> On Coruscant, Anakin tells Palpatine that General Grievous has been found on Utapau. Anakin insists he should be on Utapau as well. Their conversation shifts to Palpatine's knowledge of the Force and dark side, both of which he learned from his mentor (Plagueis), much to the shock of Anakin who starts to become wary of the Chancellor. After Palpatine tells him that the dark side can save Padme from death, Anakin realizes that Palpatine is in fact Darth Sidious, the latter of which Palpatine confirms (This revelation means that Palpatine as Sidious engineered the Invasion of Naboo and War, betrayed and caused the deaths of Plagueis and Dooku, and has been deceiving the Jedi and Republic). Anakin ignites his lightsaber and threatens to kill Palpatine, but then decides to expose his deception and identity to the Jedi Council. He is still concerned with saving his wife, and believes only Palpatine's knowledge will ensure this. </p>

<p> Obi-Wan continues to chase General Grievous on Utapau. He catches up with the General and jumps onto his wheel bike. Using Grievous's electrostaff, he manages to destabilize the speeder, and it goes into a spin. Both Obi-Wan and Grievous are thrown off as the speeder topples over the edge of Grievous's secret landing platform. Grievous then draws his blaster, though it is knocked from his hand by Obi-Wan, now wielding the electrostaff. He knocks Grievous down, and a brawl ensues, during which Kenobi tears open the General's chest plates, revealing his living organs. Enraged, Grievous repeatedly hits Obi-Wan and then picks up the helpless Jedi and throws him over the edge. Obi-Wan barely manages to hang on and momentarily dangles for his life. As Grievous moves in for the kill, Obi-Wan uses the Force to retrieve the General's blaster and fires at Grievous's exposed organs. He hits, and they burst into flames. With his eyes flaming, Grievous falls to the floor, dead. </p>

<p> Anakin returns to the Jedi Temple and approaches Windu who tells Anakin that they have just been informed that Obi-Wan has destroyed General Grievous and so they are going to go to the Senate to ensure that Chancellor Palpatine gives back his emergency powers. However, Anakin reveals that Palpatine is a Sith Lord and is not likely to give up his powers, a statement which shocks Windu and stops him dead in his tracks. Anakin confirms what he just said and says he believes Palpatine is the one they have been looking for. When Windu asks how Anakin knows this, he tells Windu that Palpatine knows the ways of the Force and has been trained to use the dark side and that he is absolutely sure. Windu says their worst fears have now been realized and that if the Jedi Order is to survive, they must move quickly. Anakin warns Windu that Palpatine is very powerful and they'll need his help to arrest Palpatine, but Windu urges him to stay out of it as he senses much fear in Anakin and it could cloud his judgment. Windu also adds that if what Anakin says is true then Anakin will have gained his trust but for now, he wants Anakin to wait in the Council Chambers until he returns. Masters Windu, Kit Fisto, Agen Kolar, and Saesee Tiin board a gunship and head to Palpatine's office. </p>

<p> Sidious and Windu continue the fight, dueling fiercely. The fight appears to be even early on, but Windu gradually gains ground, slowly driving the Sith Lord out of the Chancellor's antechamber and into the office proper. Shortly after the two shatter a large glass window, Windu delivers a kick to Sidious, leading to Sidious falling down and losing his lightsaber. Anakin arrives just as Windu holds Sidious at blade point. Windu declares Sidious has lost, but the Sith Lord then unleashes a torrent of Force lightning. However, Windu deflects it with his blade, casting much of the energy back into Sidious' body. Sidious becomes hideously deformed; his face becomes deathly pale and sagged, his teeth become yellow and rotten, his fingernails become long and dirty, and his eyes turn burning yellow with blood-red rims. He then ends his assault, claiming he is too weak to fight on. As Windu is deciding to kill Sidious, Anakin argues that Palpatine must stand trial: Windu disregards this, stating Sidious's control over the Senate and courts make him too dangerous to be left alive. Anakin is finally forced to choose between the Jedi Order or Padmé. As Windu is about to deliver the killing blow, Anakin betrays Windu and cuts off his sword arm. Sidious, cackling with glee, tortures and blasts the shocked Windu out of the window, sending him plunging to his death hundreds of stories below. </p>

<p> In the Chancellor's office within the Imperial Senate Building, Yoda confronts Palpatine. He tells him that he knows of Anakin's turning, while addressing him as his Sith name. Sidious uses Force Lightning to push the Jedi Master backwards into a pillar. Obi-Wan and Vader battle over the bridge and enter the Klegger Corp Mining Facility, making their way through the hallways. Returning to Coruscant, Sidious tells Yoda that the Jedi will be no more. The Jedi master stands up and pushes him backwards past the desk. They engage in an intense battle using their lightsabers and Force abilities. At the Mustafarian Mining Complex, Obi-Wan and Vader battle in the conference room on the desk. Vader attempts to force choke the Jedi master with the enabled lightsaber. Obi-Wan loses it after getting kicked in the stomach, but he retrieves it. Yoda resumes fighting Sidious until they are taken the Galactic Senate Chamber, the heart of the Senate. Vader is still battling Obi-Wan, who is on the defensive. They fight command center with the dead Separatist leaders on the floor. A missed slash from Vader's lightsaber damages a computer console, deactivating the facility's shields. As the door opens, Obi-Wan and Vader exit the mining facility and head outside. At the Galactic Senate Chamber, Sidious hurls Senate pods at Yoda, and the effort to avoid them exhausts the Jedi Master. Sidious then blasts Yoda with Force Lightning, causing the Jedi master to lose his lightsaber. With the last of his strength, Yoda redirects it back at him, but this causes an explosion that throws both himself and Sidious over the edge of the pod. </p>

<p> Obi-Wan and Vader's battle continue on as they tip-toe across some pipes. A mining droid comes by the Jedi and they fight with their lightsabers. The pair jump onto a bridge and walk onto some large stalks. At the same time, deadly lava blasts towards Vader and Obi-Wan, forcing them to take cover from raining debris. The lava cuts off a collection arm attached to the main structure. Sidious is able to hold on to a senate pod, while Yoda falls to the senate floor leaving his cloak behind. With Bail Organa's help, Yoda flees the Senate Building, intending to go into exile. Back on Mustafar, the rest of the battle resumes. Obi-Wan and Vader ride the collection arm down the lava river below, which falls over a molten waterfall. Abandoning the arm, Obi-Wan leaps onto a hovering mining platform below, with Vader pursuing him back up the lava river atop a collection droid. Obi-Wan appeals to his old friend one last time, but Vader still refuses to see reason, forcing Obi-Wan to accept that his student, friend, and brother is corrupted beyond redemption. </p>

<p> As Obi-Wan watches, Vader, helpless and now fully consumed by the dark side, tries in vain to pull his crippled, smoking body up the embankment with his one remaining mechanical arm. Obi-Wan is overcome with disgust and sadness at the pitiful fate of "The Chosen One," and is reduced nearly to tears. He angrily shouts that Vader has failed in his life and destiny, and has hurt all those who loved him, including Obi-Wan himself. All Vader can do is scream in pain and powerless rage, cursing his former friend and Master. The lava below Vader then catches his leg, setting him on fire, horribly burning and disfiguring him, with Obi-Wan turning away from the terror, unwilling to kill him. After briefly staring at the charred, mutilated figure that was once Anakin Skywalker, Obi-Wan turns and walks away, taking Anakin's dropped lightsaber with him. He returns to the star skiff and leaves the planet with the unconscious Padmé and her droids. Obi-Wan feels guilt for failing Anakin & Padmé's happiness. </p>

<p> A video game based on the film was released on May 5, 2005, two weeks before the film. The game followed the movie's storyline, for the most part, integrating scenes from the movie. However, many sections of the game featured cut scenes from the movie or entirely new scenes for the game. The style of the game was mostly lightsaber combat and fighting as Obi-Wan or Anakin/Vader. One unique and popular aspect of the game was that it included an alternate ending, which functioned as such to both the game and the movie, which involved Obi-Wan warning Vader about having the high ground, to which Vader leaps and dodges Obi-Wan's attempted Mou kei and subsequently stabs his former master in the back, killing him. After his death, Vader kicks Obi-Wan's lifeless corpse down the black sand bank, grins, and walks off, as Palpatine arrives on Mustafar to congratulate Vader on his victory. Vader proceeds towards Sidious' docked shuttle, and the new emperor declares the galaxy to belong to the both of them and gives Vader his new, red-bladed lightsaber. After quickly examining his new lightsaber, Vader ignites it and impales his Sith master, declaring the galaxy to belong only to him. </p>

<p> Despite the Walt Disney Company's 2012 purchase of Lucasfilm and the release rights to all future Star Wars films, Fox was to retain original distribution rights to Star Wars: Episode IV A New Hope, which they co-produced and co-financed, in perpetuity in all media worldwide. Fox was also to retain theatrical, nontheatrical, and home video rights worldwide for the franchise's five subsequent films, which Lucasfilm produced and financed independently, through May 2020, at which time ownership was to transfer to Disney. This complex relationship between Fox and Disney, particularly in regards to Fox's perpetual rights to Episode IV, was to create an obstacle for any future boxed set comprising all nine films.[14] On December 14, 2017, The Walt Disney Company announced that it was acquiring most of Fox's parent company, 21st Century Fox, including the film studio and all distribution rights to A New Hope.[15] On March 20, 2019, the deal was officially completed.[16] On April 12, 2019, a Blu-ray box set containing the nine main installments of the Star Wars saga remastered in 4K was reportedly announced to be in development for a 2020 release.[17] </p>

<p> Within the Legends continuity, Kevin J. Anderson's novels Jedi Search and Champions of the Force explain that a prototype Death Star was built in preparation for the construction of the first Death Star in A New Hope. These conflicting accounts were retconned in The New Essential Chronology, which stated that the former was a testbed prototype for the superlaser to be installed on the latter. The Chronology also mentions the fact that in order to ensure protection from sabotage, the construction site was moved to various locations throughout the nineteen-year gap between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope, indicating that there were various attempts by unknown persons to disable or even destroy the massive battle station, a theory supported by a line from A New Hope where Vader proclaims that "There will be no one to stop us this time" in regard to the Death Star and its plans. The another Legends novels The Dark Nest Trilogy, written by Troy Denning, explore the continuity pieces about the holographic recordings of Anakin, Padme, and Obi-Wan in R2's memory banks. Although the Skywalker family saga comes full circle, Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa still don't know their mother's identity, but Luke has stumbled on a memory of R2-D2's that contains her image, even he watches a hologram of Anakin Force-choking Padmé, as well as his and Leia's birth. Denning shows Artoo's desire to hide these recordings from Luke – no doubt feeling he will learn something hurtful – while couching it in the fact that the astromech droid has developed quirks in his circuitry. </p>

<p> Much of the crew make cameos in the film. For example Nick Gillard, the stunt coordinator, plays a character named Cin Drallig (his name spelled backwards, omitting the k). Rick McCallum's daughter Mousy plays one of the Padawans killed by Darth Vader, named Bene. Visual effects supervisor John Knoll played the Coruscant firefighter pilot. When Palpatine, Anakin, and Obi-Wan are falling down the elevator shaft in the beginning of the movie, it is John Knoll's hand that grabs the wire, not Hayden Christensen's. Also in the movie was Jeremy Bulloch (Boba Fett in the original trilogy), who played Captain Jeremoch Colton, the pilot of the CR70 corvette, and later CR90 Rebel Blockade Runner, Tantive III. This was a speaking role. A number of Lucasfilm and ILM employees also made cameo appearances on the balconies of the Galaxies Opera House, while on the steps Anthony Daniels reprised his Episode II cameo as Dannl Faytonni. </p>

<p> On Polis Massa, Padmé dies after giving birth to twins Luke and Leia. Meanwhile, Sidious finds Vader barely alive on Mustafar and brings him back to Coruscant, rebuilding his apprentice's ruined body with cybernetic limbs and a respirator. Tormented by the discovery of Padmé's death at his own hands, Vader screams, the last vestige of humanity driven from him. As Vader supervises the Death Star's construction, a funeral is held for Padmé, her body dressed to continue the illusion of pregnancy. Knowing that the twins must remain hidden from the Empire, Senator Bail Organa adopts Leia and takes her to Alderaan, while Luke is to be taken to his stepfamily on Tatooine. Organa allows the droids C-3PO and R2-D2 to remain aboard the Tantive IV and has C-3PO's memory erased. Yoda teaches Obi-Wan how to commune with the spirit of Qui-Gon Jinn before going into exile on Dagobah. The film closes showing Obi-Wan taking the infant Luke to Tatooine, where he intends to watch over him until the time is right to challenge the Empire. </p>

<p> It was announced in 2004 that Gary Oldman had been approached to provide the voice of General Grievous;[4] however, complications arose during contract negotiations after Oldman learned the film was to be made outside of the Screen Actors Guild, of which he is a member. He backed out of the role rather than violate the union's rules.[5] Matthew Wood, who ultimately voiced Grievous, disputed this story at Celebration III, held in Indianapolis. According to him, Oldman is a friend of Rick McCallum, producer of the Star Wars prequel trilogy, and recorded an audition as a favor to him, but was not chosen.[6] Wood, who was also the supervising sound editor, was in charge of the auditions and submitted his audition anonymously in the midst of 30 others, under the initials "A.S." for Alan Smithee.[7] Days later he received a phone call asking for the full name to the initials "A.S."[8] An internet hoax said John Rhys-Davies was considered for the role.[9] </p>

<p> Lucas makes an appearance at the Coruscant Opera House as a blue-faced being named Baron Papanoida; he can be seen outside Palpatine's box. It marks Lucas' only appearance in any of the Star Wars films. His three children also appear in cameos: his son, Jett, as a young Jedi-in-training named Zett Jukassa who is killed defending the Jedi Temple against clone troopers; his daughter, Amanda, as a character called Terr Taneel, seen in the security hologram; and daughter Katie as a blue-skinned Pantoran named Chi Eekway, visible when Palpatine arrives at the Senate after being saved by the Jedi, and talking to Baron Papanoida at the Opera House (she also has a brief speaking role in one of the deleted scenes where Padmé is meeting in secret with other senators). When Anakin, Obi-Wan, and Palpatine arrive via shuttle to the Senate docks after crash landing on Coruscant, the Millennium Falcon can be seen landing on one of the lower platforms as the shuttle approaches.[10] </p>

<p> For the Kashyyyk environment, the art department turned to The Star Wars Holiday Special for inspiration.[21] Over a period of months, Lucas would approve hundreds of designs that would eventually appear in the film. He would later rewrite entire scenes and action sequences to correspond to certain designs he had chosen.[20] The designs were then shipped to "pre-visualization" to create moving CGI versions known as "animatics". Ben Burtt would edit these scenes with Lucas in order to previsualize what the film would look like before the scenes were even filmed.[20] The pre-visualization footage featured a basic raw CGI environment with equally unprocessed CGI characters performing a scene (typically an action sequence). Steven Spielberg was also allowed to assist both the art and pre-visualization department's designs for several action sequences in Revenge of the Sith.[20] Later, the pre-visualization and art department designs were sent to the production department to begin "bringing the film out of the concept phase"[20] by building the various sets, props and costumes. To determine the required sets, Lucas analyzed each scene with the staff to see which moments the actors would come in most contact with the set, warranting the set to be constructed. </p>

<p> Revenge of the Sith premiered at the 2005 Cannes Film Festival (out of competition) on May 16.[29] Its theatrical release in most other countries took place on May 19 to coincide with the 1999 release of The Phantom Menace (the 1977-1997-2004 release of A New Hope and the 1983-1997-2004 release of Return of the Jedi were also released on the same day and month, six years apart). The global outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas claimed one week before the premiere that it may have cost the U.S. economy approximately US$627 million in lost productivity because of employees who took a day off or reported in sick.[30] Grauman's Chinese Theatre, a traditional venue for the Star Wars films, did not show it. However, a line of people stood there for more than a month hoping to convince someone to change this.[31] Most of them took advantage of an offer to see the film at a nearby cinema, ArcLight Cinemas (formerly the "Cinerama Dome").[32] On May 16, the Empire Cinema in London's Leicester Square hosted a day-long Star Wars marathon showing of all six films; an army of Imperial stormtroopers "guarded" the area, and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra gave a free concert of Star Wars music.[33] </p>

<p> Shortly after the above-mentioned print was leaked, it was released in Shanghai as a bootleg DVD with Chinese subtitles. The unknown producer of this DVD, for unexplained reasons, also elected to include English subtitles, which were in fact translated back into English from the Chinese translation, rather than using the original English script. This translation was particularly inept, translating many characters literally and losing the meaning of words, leading to unintentional humor; the title of the film, for example, was given as Star War — The third gathers — The Backstroke of the West. One error in translation that recurs several times in the film is that the phrase "it seems" (好象) was rendered as "good elephant". Jedi Council becomes Presbyterian Church. The mis-translation also caused the word "fuck" (a mis-translation of "work") to appear four times in the subtitles, and rendered Darth Vader's cry of "Noooooooo" (不要) as "Do not want."[37][38] This last translation error would later be popularized as an internet meme.[39] </p>

<p> Revenge of the Sith is the only Star Wars film to receive a PG rating from the MPAA, officially for "sci-fi violence and some intense images", namely for the scene in which Darth Vader is set aflame by lava and molten rock. Some critics, including Roger Ebert and Richard Roeper, later responded that children would be able to handle the film as long as they had parental guidance, hence a "PG rating".[40] At the same time, Lucas had stated months before the MPAA's decision that he felt the film should receive a PG-13 rating, because of Anakin's final moments and the film's content being the darkest and most intense of all six films.[41] All previously released films in the series were rated PG. The PG-13 rating had not existed when the films in the original trilogy were released; however, the original trilogy's films were later re-submitted to the MPAA due to changes in the re-released versions and once again received PG ratings. When Revenge of the Sith was released in Canada, it was given a PG rating in most provinces, excluding Quebec, where it was rated PG. In the United Kingdom it received a 12A rating. In Australia, the film was rated M for mature audiences (similar to PG). </p>

<p> Critical reaction towards the film was generally positive. Film review site Rotten Tomatoes calculated an approval rating of 80% based on 253 reviews, making it the prequel trilogy's highest-rated film and the third highest-rated film of the entire Star Wars saga: The Phantom Menace, Attack of the Clones and Return of the Jedi are rated 57%, 67%, and 79% respectively, while A New Hope and The Empire Strikes Back are rated 94% and 97% respectively. Some critics considered it the best of the prequels,[51] while other reviewers judged it to be the best Star Wars film since The Empire Strikes Back. A. O. Scott of The New York Times concluded that it was "the best of the four episodes Mr. Lucas has directed," and equal to The Empire Strikes Back as "the richest and most challenging movie in the cycle".[51] In a 2007 summary of the 100 Best Science-Fiction Films on Rotten Tomatoes, Revenge of the Sith was placed 51 out of 100, making it the only prequel film in the Star Wars series to earn a ranking. Jonathan Rosenbaum, a critic who disliked A New Hope and The Empire Strikes Back, gave the film a positive review saying that it had a "relatively thoughtful story." Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film 3½ stars out of four, writing "If [Lucas] got bogged down in solemnity and theory in "Episode II: Attack of the Clones", the Force is in a jollier mood this time, and "Revenge of the Sith" is a great entertainment."[52] Camille Paglia praised the film, comparing some of its scenes to works by modern painters.[53] </p>

<p> With only the May 19 earnings, the film broke four box office records: midnight screenings gross (previously held by The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King, $8 million), opening day gross (Spider-Man 2, with $40.4 million), single day gross (Shrek 2 with $44.8 million) and Thursday gross (The Matrix Reloaded with $37.5 million).[58] Its single day gross record and opening day gross record were later surpassed by Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest on July 7, 2006, when that movie grossed $55.5 million on its opening day,[59] and midnight screening gross was broken by The Dark Knight on July 18, 2008 with $18.5 million.[60] It still retains its record for Thursday gross, however. According to box office analysis sites, the film set American records for highest gross in a given number of days for each of its first 12 days of release except for the seventh and eighth, where the record is narrowly held by Spider-Man 2. On its fifth day, it became the highest-grossing film of 2005, surpassing Hitch ($177.6 million). The film earned $158.5 million in its first four-day period, surpassing the previous four-day record held by The Matrix Reloaded ($134.3 million), and joining Spider-Man, The Matrix Reloaded and Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire as the only films to make $100 million in three days. In eight days, it reached the $200 million mark (record tied with Spider-Man 2) and by its 17th day, the film had passed $300 million (surpassing the record of 18 days of Shrek 2). It was eventually the third-fastest film (after Shrek 2 and Spider-Man) to reach $350 million.[1] </p>

<p> The film's novelization was written by Matthew Stover. It includes much more dialogue than the film, including a conversation between Count Dooku and Darth Sidious, where the reader learns Palpatine lied to Dooku about what the Empire would truly be; and a conversation between Mace Windu and Obi-Wan Kenobi where Kenobi expresses self-doubt about whether he is the right Jedi to battle General Grievous, only to be told by Windu that while many consider him (Windu) to be a master-swordsman due to his creation of the Vaapad fighting style, he considers Kenobi the superior swordsman because he took an existing style (Soresu) and mastered it to the highest degree. The novel includes many minor details. For example, during the Battle of Coruscant, Anakin's callsign is Red 5, a reference to Luke's callsign in the climactic battle of A New Hope, and one of the Republic capital ships is commanded by Lieutenant Commander Lorth Needa, who becomes Captain Needa in The Empire Strikes Back. There are also references to the Star Wars: Republic comic book series, such as the Battle of Jabiim (Volume 3). In addition to this, the siege of the Jedi Temple is much more violent and far more graphically explained than the cinematic version.[77] </p>

<p> Answer: Star Wars Episode III, Return of the Sith, matches the Prequel Trilogy with the Original Trilogy. At the end of the episode, Obi-Wan defeats Vader but cannot force himself to deal the finishing blow to his old friend, instead leaving him to burn in the lava river on Mustafar. Vader, however, survives and must be placed in a robotic suit to continue to live and function. Yoda takes on the Emperor but is unable to defeat him. Sidious, equally, cannot overcome Yoda, but he is already in control of the galaxy and therefore doesn’t need to. Realizing the inevitable, Yoda escapes into exile on Dagobah. After choking Padme in a blind rage, Anakin’s children are born prematurely, and his wife passes away shortly after. Luke is taken to his step-uncle, Owen, on Tatooine, and Leia is adopted by Bail Organa and his wife. Obi-Wan delivers Luke to Owen and Beru and then remains on the planet to watch over him. Through the Force, both Obi-Wan and Yoda are taught by Qui-Gon Jinn to preserve their consciousnesses after death. This is why they can appear as Force Ghosts in the Original Trilogy and have such disdain for death. </p>

<p> Answer: Return of the Sith is arguably the most tragic of the Skywalker Saga, resulting in the deaths of many much-loved Jedi and other main characters. Disregarding all the clone troopers that give their lives fighting the Separatists, the following characters meet their ends: Count Dooku – defeated and executed by Anakin in front of Palpatine on Grievous’ command ship. General Grievous – killed by Obi-Wan on Utapau. Agen Kolar – quickly dispatched by Chancellor Palpatine. Saesee Tiin – also killed by Palpatine. Kit Fisto – also killed by Palpatine. Mace Windu – thrown out of a window by Palpatine after Anakin sliced his hand off and assumed dead. Ki-Adi-Mundi – executed by Captain Bacara on Mygeeto during Order 66. Aayla Secura – executed by Commander Bly on Felucia during Order 66. Plo Koon – executed by Captain Jag on Cato Neimoidia during Order 66. Stass Allie – executed by Commander Neyo on Saleucami during Order 66. Commander Gree – beheaded by Yoda before he can execute him. Zett Jukassa – the young padawan killed by clones in front of Bail Organa. Separatist leaders – killed by Anakin to end the Clone Wars and tie up the last loose ends of Palpatine’s plan. The leaders included Nute Gunray, San Hill, Poggle the Lesser, Wat Tambor, and Rune Haako. Padme Amidala – Anakin’s wife is ultimately killed by him in a fit of rage, as she cannot cope with his turn to the dark side. In fact, of the Jedi Council at the time of Order 66, only Obi-Wan and Yoda would survive (and, of course, Anakin as Darth Vader). Order 66, combined with Palpatine’s slaughter of Kolar, Tiin, Fisto, and ultimately Windu, meant that nine out of the 12 Council members were killed (plus Anakin Skywalker, in symbol). </p>

<p> Answer: While it isn’t explicitly mentioned in the films, Obi-Wan is known amongst the Jedi as the master of Soresu (Form III), the most defensive lightsaber form. Some speculate – including me – that Obi-Wan and Anakin completely retrain their approach to lightsaber combat after their humiliating defeat to Count Dooku in Attack of the Clones. Obi-Wan becomes the master of Soresu – defensive fighting. In contrast, Anakin trains himself in Djem So (Form V), a much more offensive and aggressive fighting style (which still retains some defensive aspects from Soresu). As Kenobi says when Count Dooku confronts them at the start of Revenge of the Sith, “This time we’ll do it together,” implying that he’ll be doing the defensive work and Anakin the offensive. By doing this, they can keep up with Dooku’s superior swordsmanship and work together to defeat him. In theory. Of course, it doesn’t quite go to plan, as Dooku focuses on separating them. He then dispatches with Obi-Wan, leaving him to take on Skywalker alone. Anakin eventually defeats him, but not through his lightsaber form. Rather, he briefly gives in to his anger and hatred, using the dark side to overpower the Count. Because Obi-Wan is the master of Soresu, it’s the perfect defense against Grievous’ four-fold attacks. Grievous relies on intimidation and brute Force to get the better of his opponents, and so the most defensive lightsaber form is needed to counter him. Finally, the Jedi knights are spread thinly across the galaxy. Yoda is needed on Kashyyyk, and many of the other Council members are fighting across various systems. Only a few Jedi Masters are actually at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant at this time, and some need to stay to defend it, of course. It seems that the Jedi are spread so thinly that they can only afford to send one person to confront Grievous – and there is no better choice than Obi-Wan. </p>

<p> Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace is a 1999 American epic space opera film written and directed by George Lucas in his first directorial effort since Star Wars.[lower-alpha 2] The film stars Liam Neeson, Ewan McGregor, Natalie Portman, Jake Lloyd, Ahmed Best, Ian McDiarmid, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker, Pernilla August, and Frank Oz. It is the fourth film in the Star Wars film series, the first film of the prequel trilogy and the first chronological chapter of the "Skywalker Saga". Set 32 years before the original trilogy (13 years before the formation of the Galactic Empire), during the era of the Galactic Republic, the plot follows Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi as they try to protect Padmé Amidala of Naboo in hopes of securing a peaceful end to an interplanetary trade dispute. Joined by Anakin Skywalker—a young slave with unusually strong natural powers of the Force—they simultaneously contend with the mysterious return of the Sith. The film was produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by 20th Century Fox.[lower-alpha 3] </p>

<p> The Phantom Menace was released in theaters on May 19, 1999, almost 16 years after the premiere of Return of the Jedi. The film's premiere was extensively covered by media and was widely anticipated because of the large cultural following the Star Wars saga had cultivated. Upon its release, The Phantom Menace received mixed reviews from critics. While the visual effects were praised, criticism was largely focused on its exposition and characters—particularly Jar Jar Binks. The film was a box-office success and broke numerous records. It grossed $924 million worldwide during its initial theatrical run, becoming the highest-grossing film of 1999, the second-highest-grossing film of all-time, and the third-highest in North America (behind Titanic and Star Wars), as well as the highest-grossing Star Wars film at the time (not factoring in inflation). The film has been re-released several times, including a 2012 3D reissue which brought its overall worldwide gross to over $1 billion. Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005) followed The Phantom Menace, rounding out the Star Wars prequel trilogy. </p>

<p> The Trade Federation has disrupted order in the Galactic Republic by blockading the planet Naboo in secret preparation for a full-scale invasion. The Republic's leader, Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum, dispatches Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice, Obi-Wan Kenobi, to negotiate with Trade Federation Viceroy Nute Gunray. Darth Sidious, a Sith Lord and the Trade Federation's secret benefactor, orders the Viceroy to kill the Jedi and begin their invasion with an army of battle droids. Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan escape and flee to Naboo. Amid the invasion, Qui-Gon rescues a bumbling Gungan outcast, Jar Jar Binks. Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan fail to persuade the Gungan leader Boss Nass to aid the planet's surface dwellers but manage to obtain Template:Nowrap guidance and underwater transport to Theed, the capital city of Naboo. After rescuing Queen Padmé Amidala, the group makes their escape from Naboo aboard her Royal Starship, intending to reach the Republic capital planet of Coruscant. </p>

<p> The ship is damaged passing through the Federation blockade, and the group lands for repairs on the outlying desert planet of Tatooine, situated beyond the Republic's jurisdiction. Qui-Gon, Jar Jar, astromech droid R2-D2, and Padmé—disguised as one of her handmaidens—visit the settlement of Mos Espa to purchase a new part for the hyperdrive. They encounter a junk dealer, Watto, and his nine-year-old slave Anakin Skywalker, a gifted pilot and engineer who has built a protocol droid, C-3PO. Qui-Gon senses a strong presence of the Force within Anakin and is convinced that he is the prophesied "Chosen One," who is destined to restore balance to the Force. With Watto refusing to accept payment in Republic currency, Qui-Gon wagers both the required hyperdrive part and Anakin's freedom on a podrace. Anakin wins the race and joins the group to be trained as a Jedi, leaving behind his mother, Shmi. En route to their starship, Qui-Gon is attacked by Darth Maul, Sidious's apprentice, who was sent to capture Amidala. After a brief lightsaber duel, Qui-Gon escapes onboard the starship with the others. </p>

<p> Throughout the 1980s, Lucas said he had no desire to return to Star Wars and had canceled his sequel trilogy by the time of Return of the Jedi. However, because Lucas had developed most of the backstory, the idea of prequels continued to fascinate him.[12] In the early 1990s, Star Wars saw a resurgence in popularity in the wake of Dark Horse's comic line and Timothy Zahn's trilogy of novels. Lucas saw that there was still a large audience for his idea of a prequel trilogy, and with the development of special effects generated with computer-generated imagery (CGI), Lucas considered returning to his saga and directing the film.[13] In October 1993, it was announced in Variety and other sources that he would be making the prequels.[14] Lucas began outlining the story; Anakin Skywalker rather than Obi-Wan Kenobi would be the protagonist, and the series would be a tragedy examining Darth Vader's origins. A relic of the original outline was that Anakin would, like his son, grow up on Tatooine.[15] Lucas also began to change the prequels' timeline relative to the original series; instead of filling in the tangential history, they would form the beginning of a long story that started with Anakin's childhood and ended with his death. This was the final step toward turning the franchise into a saga.[16] </p>

<p> The larger budget and possibilities opened up by the use of digital effects made Lucas "think about a much grander, more epic scale—which is what I wanted Star Wars to be".[20] The story ended with five simultaneous, ongoing plots, one leading to another. The central plot is Palpatine's intent to become Chancellor, which leads to the Trade Federation's attack on Naboo, the Jedi being sent there, Anakin being met along the way, and the rise of the Sith Lords. As with the original trilogy, Lucas intended The Phantom Menace to illustrate several themes throughout the narrative. Duality is a frequent theme; Amidala is a queen who passes as a handmaiden, Palpatine plays on both sides of the war, among others. "Balance" is frequently suggested; Anakin is supposedly "the one" chosen to bring balance to the Force—Lucas said, "Anakin needed to have a mother, Obi-Wan needed a Master, Darth Sidious needed an apprentice" as without interaction and dialogue, "you wouldn't have drama".[21] </p>

<p> Within three to four months of Lucas beginning the writing process, Chiang and his design team started a two-year process of reviewing thousands of designs for the film.[26] Chiang stated that Lucas intended Episode I to be stylistically different from the other Star Wars films; it would be "richer and more like a period piece, since it was the history leading up to A New Hope." The story takes place on three planets, some with varied environments such as the human and Gungan cities of Naboo and three buildings in Coruscant. With the exception of the Gungan city, which had an Art Nouveau-inspired visual, these locations would be given distinctive looks with some basis in the real world. The concept drawings of Ralph McQuarrie for the original trilogy served as the basis for Mos Espa—which was also inspired by old Tunisian hotels and buildings and had touches such as a marketplace to differentiate it from A New Hope's Mos Eisley—and Coruscant, in particular a metropolis design that became the basis for the Senate.[27] Bocquet would later develop the work of Chiang's team and design the interiors, translating the concepts into construction blueprints with environments and architectural styles that had some basis in reality "to give the audience something to key into."[28] Some elements were directly inspired by the original trilogy; Lucas described the battle droids as predecessors to the stormtroopers. Chiang uses that orientation to base the droids on the Imperial soldiers, only in the same style of stylized and elongated features seen in tribal African art.[20] </p>

<p> Stunt coordinator Nick Gillard was recruited to create a new Jedi fighting style for the prequel trilogy. Gillard likened the lightsaber battles to a chess game "with every move being a check". Because of their short-range weapons, Gillard thought that the Jedi would have had to develop a fighting style that merged every sword fighting style, such as kendo and other kenjutsu styles, with other swinging techniques, such as tennis swings and tree-chopping. While training Liam Neeson and Ewan McGregor, Gillard wrote a sequence that lasted around 60 seconds and intended to be around five or six sequences per fight.[32] Lucas later referred to the Jedi as "negotiators" rather than high-casualty soldiers. The preference of hand-to-hand combat was intended to give a spiritual and intellectual role to the Jedi.[32] Because Gillard thought that the stunt jumps with the actors and stuntmen dangling from wires did not look realistic, air rams were used to propel them into the air instead.[33] </p>

<p> Lucas decided to make elaborate costumes, because the film's society was more sophisticated than the one depicted in the original trilogy. Designer Trisha Biggar and her team created over 1,000 costumes that were inspired by various cultures.[34] Biggar worked closely with concept designer Iain McCaig to create a color palette for the inhabitants of each world: Tatooine followed A New Hope with sun-bleached sand colors, Coruscant had grays, browns and blacks, and Naboo had green and gold for humans while Gungans wore "a leathery look, like their skin". The Jedi costumes followed the tradition from the original film;[35] Obi-Wan's costume was inspired by the costume that was worn by Guinness. Lucas said he and Biggar would look at the conceptual art to "translat[e] all of these designs into cloth and fabric and materials that would actually work and not look silly". Biggar also consulted Gillard to ensure that the costumes would accommodate action scenes, and consulted the creature department to find which fabrics "wouldn't wear too heavily" on the alien skins. A huge wardrobe department was set up at Leavesden Film Studios to create over 250 costumes for the main actors and 5,000 for the background ones.[36] </p>

<p> After Samuel L. Jackson expressed interest in appearing in a Star Wars film, he was approached by casting director Robin Gurland to play Mace Windu.[41] Rapper Tupac Shakur was also considered for the role of Mace Windu.[42] Ray Park, a martial arts champion with experience in gymnastics and sword fighting, was originally a member of the stunt crew.[41] Stunt coordinator Nick Gillard filmed Park to demonstrate his conception of the lightsaber battles. Lucas and McCallum were so impressed with the test tape that they gave Park the role of Maul. His voice was considered "too squeaky" and was dubbed over in post-production by Peter Serafinowicz.[43] Keira Knightley's parents tried to convince her not to audition, but she still sought a role since she was a Star Wars fan.[44] The casting was influenced by Knightley's remarkable similarity to Natalie Portman, with Knightley admitting their mothers could not tell them apart.[45] Knightley was reported to have "cried every single day" due to finding the wardrobe uncomfortable.[44] </p>

<p> Silas Carson was cast as Nute Gunray because another actor was uncomfortable with the costumes used by the Trade Federation characters, which were hot, exerted a lot of pressure on the bearer, and took about 15 minutes to apply. Hugh Quarshie considered the part of Panaka as "a good career move" and a production that would be fun to make.[52] Brian Blessed originally auditioned for the role of Sio Bibble, the Governor of Naboo,[53] for which he was considered "too loud".[54] Casting director Robin Gurland approached him to play Nass because it was a "bigger than life" character with "a kind of bravado".[55] Blessed described Nass as a "reluctant hero".[54] Sofia Coppola, daughter of Lucas' long-time friend and creative partner Francis Ford Coppola, considers Lucas as "like an uncle to me". As she prepared the script for her directorial debut The Virgin Suicides, Coppola heard Lucas would be making a new Star Wars film and asked him if she could accompany him during filming. Lucas offered Coppola a role in the royal entourage, which she accepted because it "seemed like a good vantage point to watch without getting in the way".[56] </p>

<p> Until the film's production, many special effects in the film industry were achieved using miniature models, matte paintings and on-set visual effects—although other films had made extensive use of CGI. Knoll previewed 3,500 storyboards for the film; Lucas accompanied him to explain factors of the shots that would be practical and those that would be created through visual effects. Knoll later said that on hearing the explanations of the storyboards, he did not know how to accomplish what he had seen. The result was a mixture of original techniques and the newest digital techniques to make it difficult for the viewer to guess which technique was being used. Knoll and his visual effects team wrote new computer software, including cloth simulators to allow a realistic depiction of the digital characters' clothing, to create certain shots. Another goal was to create computer-generated characters that could act seamlessly with live-action actors. While filming scenes with CGI characters, Lucas would block the characters using their corresponding voice actors on-set. The voice actors were then removed and the live-action actors would perform the same scene alone. A CGI character would later be added into the shot to complete the conversation.[72] Lucas also used CGI to correct the physical presence of actors in certain scenes.[39] Practical models were used when their visuals helped with miniature sceneries for backgrounds, set extensions and model vehicles that would be scanned to create the digital models or filmed to represent spaceships and podraces.[73] </p>

<p> The Jedi practice Zen-like meditation and martial arts, as did the ancient Japanese Samurai warriors. The name "Qui-Gon" adapts the term qigong, which refers to a Chinese discipline involving meditation and cultivation of the flow of the vital energy called "qi" for healing, health, and combat. The words qi (Chinese), gi (Korean), ki (Japanese), and the Indian term "Prana" all refer to the energy that is thought to flow through all living things, from the source of all qi (or power), which is "The Way" or "The Tao" in Chinese philosophy. In Taoist philosophy, from The Way, yin and yang—the opposing but complementary aspects of reality or nature—are born. Unlike Chinese philosophy, in which yin and yang are not moral qualities, the ancient Persian philosophy of Zurvanism taught that the dualism of dark and light forces are locked in an eternal battle while being two sides (or evolutes) of the same "Force", the force of time itself (Zurvan)—the prime mover. These elements derive primarily from Eastern and Iranian religions and myths.[77] </p>

<p> As with other Star Wars films, themes about family and hope are featured prominently. In the Disney Gallery: The Mandalorian episode "Legacy", Dave Filoni explains that the use of "Duel of the Fates" during the lightsaber duel between Darth Maul against Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi represents the fight for the fate of Anakin Skywalker. According to Filoni, Qui-Gon Jinn acts like a father figure towards Anakin because he feels he needs one after taking him from his mother, having realized that the Jedi shouldn't be opposed to love and care. In the end, Qui-Gon dies, and thus Anakin loses his father figure; Obi-Wan Kenobi ultimately becomes his master to honor Jinn's dying wish despite his initial contempt for him, and while he comes to eventually see him like a brother as shown in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, he doesn't act like a father, which coupled with the Jedi's indifference, seals Anakin's fate.[81] </p>

<p> The release of the first new Star Wars film in 16 years was accompanied by a considerable amount of attention. According to The Wall Street Journal, so many workers announced plans to view the premiere that many companies closed on the opening day. Queue areas formed outside cinema theaters over a month before ticket sales began. More theater lines appeared when it was announced that cinemas were not allowed to sell tickets in advance until two weeks into the release. This was because of a fear that family theatergoers would be either unable to receive tickets or would be forced to pay higher prices for them. Instead, tickets were to be sold on a first-come-first-served basis. However, after meetings with the National Association of Theatre Owners, Lucasfilm agreed to allow advance ticket sales on May 12, 1999, provided there was a limit of 12 tickets per customer. As a result, some advance tickets were sold by scalpers at prices as high as US$100 apiece, which a distribution chief called "horrible" and said was exactly what they wanted to avoid. Daily Variety reported that theater owners received strict instructions from Lucasfilm that the film could only play in the cinema's largest auditorium for the first 8–12 weeks, no honor passes were allowed for the first eight weeks, and they were obliged to send their payments to distributor 20th Century Fox within seven days. </p>

<p> Despite worries about the film being finished on time, two weeks before its theatrical release Lucasfilm moved the release date from May 21 to 19, 1999. At the ShoWest Convention, Lucas said the change was intended to give the fans a "head start" by allowing them to view it during the week and allowing families to view it during weekends. Eleven charity premieres were staged across the United States on May 16, 1999; receipts from the Los Angeles event, where corporate packages were available for between US$5,000 and US$25,000; proceeds were donated to the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation. Other charity premieres included the Dallas premiere for the Children's Medical Center, the Aubrey Fund for Pediatric Cancer Research at the Sloan-Kettering Hospital in New York, the Big Brother/Sister Association of the Philadelphia premiere, and the Children's National Medical Center in Washington, D.C. A statement said that tickets were sold at US$500 apiece and that certain sections of the theaters were set aside for disadvantaged children. </p>

<p> The film opened at 12:01 am on Wednesday, May 19, 1999, in 2,010 theaters in the United States and Canada. An additional 960 theaters screened the film later in the day. About 120 theaters showed the film continuously on opening day, including the Ziegfeld Theatre in New York City and the Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles. Foreshadowing his future conversion to digital cinematography, Lucas said the film would be released on four digital projectors (two in New York and two in Los Angeles) on June 18, 1999. Few film studios released films during the same week: DreamWorks and Universal Studios released The Love Letter on May 21 and Notting Hill on May 28, respectively. The Love Letter was a commercial failure, but Notting Hill fared better and followed The Phantom Menace closely in second place. Employment consultant firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas estimated that 2.2 million full-time employees missed work to attend the film, resulting in a US$293 million loss of productivity. </p>

<p> The release of the first new Star Wars film in 16 years was accompanied by a considerable amount of attention.[82] According to The Wall Street Journal, so many workers announced plans to view the premiere that many companies closed on the opening day.[83] Queue areas formed outside cinema theaters over a month before ticket sales began.[84] More theater lines appeared when it was announced that cinemas were not allowed to sell tickets in advance until two weeks into the release. This was because of a fear that family theater-goers would be either unable to receive tickets or would be forced to pay higher prices for them. Instead, tickets were to be sold on a first-come-first-served basis.[85] However, after meetings with the National Association of Theatre Owners, Lucasfilm agreed to allow advance ticket sales on May 12, 1999, provided there was a limit of 12 tickets per customer.[86] As a result, some advance tickets were sold by scalpers at prices as high as US$100 apiece, which a distribution chief called "horrible" and said was exactly what they wanted to avoid.[87] Daily Variety reported that theater owners received strict instructions from Lucasfilm that the film could only play in the cinema's largest auditorium for the first 8–12 weeks, no honor passes were allowed for the first eight weeks, and they were obliged to send their payments to distributor 20th Century Fox within seven days.[88] </p>

<p> Despite worries about the film being finished on time, two weeks before its theatrical release, Lucasfilm moved the release date from May 21 to 19, 1999. At the ShoWest Convention, Lucas said the change was intended to give the fans a "head start" by allowing them to view it during the week and allowing families to view it during weekends. Eleven charity premieres were staged across the United States on May 16, 1999; receipts from the Los Angeles event, where corporate packages were available for between US$5,000 and US$25,000; proceeds were donated to the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation.[89] Other charity premieres included the Dallas premiere for the Children's Medical Center, the Aubrey Fund for Pediatric Cancer Research at the Sloan-Kettering Hospital in New York, the Big Brother/Sister Association of the Philadelphia premiere, and the Children's National Medical Center in Washington, D.C. A statement said that tickets were sold at US$500 apiece and that certain sections of the theaters were set aside for disadvantaged children.[90] </p>

<p> The film opened at 12:01 am on Wednesday, May 19, 1999, in 2,010 theaters in the United States and Canada. An additional 960 theaters screened the film later in the day. About 120 theaters showed the film continuously on opening day, including the Ziegfeld Theatre in New York City and the Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles.[92] Foreshadowing his future conversion to digital cinematography, Lucas said the film would be released on four digital projectors (two in New York and two in Los Angeles) on June 18, 1999.[93] Few film studios released films during the same week: DreamWorks and Universal Studios released The Love Letter on May 21 and Notting Hill on May 28, respectively.[94] The Love Letter was a commercial failure but Notting Hill fared better and followed The Phantom Menace closely in second place.[95] Employment consultant firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas estimated that 2.2 million full-time employees missed work to attend the film, resulting in a US$293 million loss of productivity.[96] </p>

<p> A year later on June 19, 2001, it was announced that The Phantom Menace would become the first Star Wars film to be officially released on DVD, in a slightly extended cut from the theatrical releases.[99] This THX certified two-disc DVD release debuted on October 16 of the same year.[100] The first disc contains the film and the second disc contains special features. On the first disc, there are three randomized selected menus themed to the planets Naboo, Tatooine and Coruscant.[101] There is an Easter egg located in the options menu. When the THX Optimizer is highlighted, the viewer can press 1-1-3-8. By doing this, some bloopers and DVD credits will be shown.[102] The special features include seven deleted scenes completed specifically for the DVD, a commentary track featuring Lucas and producer Rick McCallum, and several documentaries—including a full-length documentary entitled The Beginning: Making Episode I.[101][103] There are also DVD-ROM features, including trailers for Attack of the Clones.[104] </p>

<p> Upon its DVD premiere on October 16, 2001, The Phantom Menace competed with other major DVD titles that were released that month, including Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs and The Godfather trilogy.[105] It became the fastest-selling DVD title of all time in the United States with 2.2 million copies being sold in its first week after release.[106][107] This surpassed the previous record briefly held by The Mummy Returns two weeks prior, which sold 2 million copies within its first week.[108] Less than a month later, The Phantom Menace's record for being the fastest-selling DVD was taken by Shrek when it sold 2.5 million copies in its first three days.[109] The Phantom Menace was one of the only four films to sell over 2 million DVD copies during their first weeks of release at the time, with the others being The Mummy Returns, Shrek and How the Grinch Stole Christmas.[110] The film would overall earn $45 million from its first week DVD sales, more than the theatrical releases of From Hell, Riding in Cars with Boys, Training Day and other post-9/11 films.[106] </p>

<p> As with previous Star Wars films, Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace's score was composed and conducted by John Williams. He started composing the score in October 1998 and began recording the music with the London Voices and London Symphony Orchestra at Abbey Road Studios on February 10, 1999. Williams decided to use electronic instruments such as synthesizers to enhance the sound and choral pieces to "capture the magical, mystical force that a regular orchestra might not have been able to provide", and create an atmosphere that was "more mysterious and mystical and less military" than those of the original trilogy.[135] One of the most notable tracks is "Duel of the Fates", which uses the chorus to give a religious, temple-like feel to the epic lightsaber duel. The track was made into a music video.[136] While composing Anakin's theme, Williams tried to reflect the innocence of his childhood and to foreshadow his transformation into Darth Vader by using slight suggestions of "The Imperial March" in the melody.[135] </p>

<p> Shows: Star Wars: The Clone Wars • Star Wars Rebels (videography) • Star Wars: Forces of Destiny • Star Wars Resistance • The Mandalorian • Star Wars: The Bad Batch • Star Wars: Visions • The Book of Boba Fett • Obi-Wan Kenobi • Andor • Tales of the Jedi • Star Wars: Young Jedi Adventures • Ahsoka • The Acolyte • Star Wars: Lando • Star Wars: Rangers of the New Republic • Skeleton Crew Games: Star Wars Battlefront II • Club Penguin Star Wars Takeover • Star Wars Battlefront • Star Wars: Tiny Death Star • Star Wars: Assault Team • Angry Birds Star Wars • Angry Birds Star Wars II • Star Wars: Scene Maker • Star Wars: Commander • Disney Infinity: 3.0 Edition • Star Wars: Uprising • Star Wars Rebels: Recon Missions • Star Wars: Mobile App • LEGO Star Wars:The Force Awakens • Star Wars: Force Arena • Star Wars Battlefront II • Disney Magic Kingdoms • Roblox • Star Wars: Squadrons • The Sims 4 Star Wars: Journey to Batuu • Star Wars Jedi: Survivor Books: Star Wars The Adventures of Luke Skywalker, Jedi Knight • Ahsoka • Star Wars: Bloodline • The Art of Rogue One: A Star Wars Story • Battlefront II: Inferno Squad • Lost Stars • Star Wars: The High Republic • The Art of Star Wars: The Force Awakens • The Art of Star Wars: The Last Jedi • The Art of Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker Comics: Marvel Comics • Star Wars Adventures • Star Wars: Forces of Destiny Cancelled projects: Star Wars: Attack Squadrons • Rogue Squadron • Untitled Kevin Feige Star Wars film </p>

<p> On the planet's surface, Qui-Gon saves native outcast Jar Jar Binks from being crushed by a Trade Federation MTT. Kenobi appears, pursued by STAPs, which are destroyed by Qui-Gon. Jar Jar Binks shows the two Jedi the way to an underwater Gungan settlement, Otoh Gunga. Meanwhile, the Trade Federation occupies Theed, the capital city of Naboo, and captures Queen Amidala along with the rest of the government. In Otoh Gunga, the Jedi meet the Gungan leader, Boss Nass, and ask him to help the people of Naboo, but Nass refuses due to hate of the people of Naboo and sends them off in a bongo submarine. They are attacked by an opee sea killer and a colo claw fish but both fish are eaten by a sando aqua monster. The Jedi, with Binks in tow, arrive in Theed and rescue Queen Amidala. They depart for Coruscant, the Galactic Republic's capital planet, to ask for help from the Senate. As they attempt to run the blockade, the queen's starship is damaged by Federation battleships, but an astromech droid named R2-D2 manages to repair it and they narrowly escape. </p>

<p> After a lengthy duel, Maul suddenly stuns Qui-Gon by hitting him on the chin with his lightsaber handle, then rams his blade straight into Qui-Gon's torso, mortally wounding him. Devastated and angered, Obi-Wan redoubles his assault upon Maul and chops the Sith's lightsaber in half, but Maul eventually overpowers and nearly kills Kenobi by Force pushing him over the edge of a seemingly bottomless reactor shaft. Obi-Wan saves himself from falling when he manages to grab onto a pipe protruding from the wall of the shaft. Maul kicks the Jedi's lightsaber into the pit and prepares to finish him off. After Obi-Wan calms himself, he uses the Force to leap out of the shaft and over Maul's head while summoning his fallen master's lightsaber to his hand. He lands behind the surprised Maul and cuts him in half; Maul's upper and lower body fall into the shaft. </p>

<p> The Phantom Menace was the first Star Wars film in 16 years. As a result, there was almost unprecedented interest amongst both fans and the wider public in the revival of the franchise. The film received enormous media-created hype, which made Lucasfilm's $20 million advertising campaign—with the distinctive artwork of Star Wars series artist Drew Struzan gracing the movie poster and other advertising—seem modest and almost unnecessary. Few film studios released films during the same week as the release of The Phantom Menace; among the more courageous were DreamWorks and Universal Studios, with the releases of The Love Letter and Notting Hill respectively. The Love Letter was a box-office flop, whereas Notting Hill fared rather well and followed The Phantom Menace closely in second place. Challenger, Grey & Christmas of Chicago, a work-issues consulting firm, estimated that 2.2 million full-time employees did not appear for work to attend the film, resulting in $293 million in lost productivity. The Wall Street Journal reported that such a large number of workers announced plans to view premiere screenings that many companies shut down on the premiere day. Many fans began waiting outside cinema theaters as early as a month in advance of ticket sales. </p>

<p> More theatre lines appeared when it was announced that cinemas were not allowed to sell tickets in advance until two weeks into the release. This was done out of fear that family theatre-goers would either be unable to receive tickets or would be forced to pay higher prices. Tickets were instead to be sold on a traditional first-come-first-serve basis. However, after meetings with the National Association of Theatre Owners, Lucasfilm agreed to allow advance ticket sales on May 12, 1999, provided that there be a 12-ticket limit per customer. As a result, however, some advance tickets were sold by "scalpers" as high as $100 apiece, which a distribution chief called "horrible," stating it was exactly what they wanted to avoid.Daily Variety reported that theatre owners received strict instructions from Lucasfilm that the film could only play in the cinema's largest auditorium for the first 8–12 weeks; no honor passes were allowed for the first eight weeks, and they were obligated to send their payments to distributor 20th Century Fox within seven days. Servers at the film's official website became gridlocked soon after the release of the first teaser trailer, and many fans of the series paid full admission to see Meet Joe Black only to leave after the trailer had run. The same tradition followed months later when the theatrical trailer was featured in front of Wing Commander. The theatrical trailer caused even more notable media hype, because it not only premiered in theaters, but screened at the ShoWest Convention in Las Vegas, and was aired on television on Entertainment Tonight and Access Hollywood. An unusual marketing scheme was pursued across the United Kingdom, where the teaser trailer was released on December 2, 1998 and then pulled from theaters six weeks later. </p>

<p> Despite worries about whether the film would be finished in time, two weeks prior to its debut Lucasfilm pushed the release date up from May 21 to May 19 of 1999. At the ShoWest Convention, Lucas stated that the change was to give the fans a "head start" by allowing them to view it over the week and allowing families the chance to view on the weekends. In a nod toward his future with digital technology, Lucas stated that the film would be released on four digital projectors on June 18, 1999. Eleven charity premieres were staged across the United States on May 16, 1999; proceeds from the Los Angeles event were given to the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation with corporate packages available for $5,000–$25,000. Other charity premieres included the Dallas premiere for Children's Medical Center, the Aubrey Fund for Pediatric Cancer Research at the Sloan-Kettering Hospital in New York, the Big Brother/Sister Assn. of the Philadelphia premiere, and the Children's National Medical Centre in Washington D.C. A statement said that tickets were sold at $500 apiece and that certain sections were set aside for disadvantaged children. </p>

<p> The DVD features a commentary track by Lucas, producer Rick McCallum, editor Ben Burtt, animation director Rob Coleman, and visual effects supervisors John Knoll, Dennis Muren, and Scott Squires. It includes seven deleted scenes completed specifically for the DVD, and The Beginning: Making Episode I, an hour-long documentary film drawn from more than 600 hours of footage, including an insider's look at Lucasfilm and ILM during the production. The viewer can access a multi-angle storyboard-to-animatic-to-film segment featuring the submarine and podrace lap 1 sequences. The DVD includes two documentary sources, five featurettes exploring the storyline, design, costumes, visual effects, and fight sequences in the film, and an award-winning twelve-part web documentary series chronicling the production. The Duel of the Fates music video featuring John Williams was included on the DVD as well. The final special features included are a never-before-seen production photo gallery with a special caption feature, theatrical posters and print campaigns from around the world, a theatrical teaser and launch trailers, seven TV spots, Star Wars: Starfighter - The Making of a Game featurette from LucasArts, and a DVD-ROM weblink to exclusive Star Wars content. </p>

<p> Despite the Walt Disney Company's 2012 purchase of Lucasfilm Ltd. and the release rights to all future Star Wars films, Fox was to retain original distribution rights to Star Wars: Episode IV A New Hope, which they co-produced and co-financed, in perpetuity in all media worldwide. Fox was also to retain theatrical, nontheatrical, and home video rights worldwide for the franchise's five subsequent films, which Lucasfilm produced and financed independently, through May 2020, at which time ownership was to transfer to Disney. This complex relationship between Fox and Disney, particularly in regards to Fox's perpetual rights to Episode IV, was to create an obstacle for any future boxed set comprising all nine films. On Thursday December 14, 2017, The Walt Disney Company announced that it was acquiring most of Fox's parent company, 21st Century Fox, including the film studio and all distribution rights to A New Hope. On Wednesday March 20, 2019, the deal was officially completed. On Friday April 12, 2019, a Blu-ray box set containing the nine main instalments of the Star Wars saga remastered in 4K was reportedly announced to be in development for a 2020 release. </p>

<p> Digital Effects Artists — Shadi Almassizadeh, Will Anielewicz, Joakim Arnesson, Okan Ataman, Al Bailey, Michael Baltazar, Eran Barnea, Maurice Bastian, Kathleen Beeler, Jeffrey Benedict, Leila Ben-Joseph, Aron Bonar, Matthew Bouchard, Stella Bogh, Gregory Brauer, Patrick Brennan, Billy Brooks, Cathy Burrow, Don Butler, Mario Caperllari, Tamala Carter, Ian Christie, Paul Churchill, Brian Conlon, Patrick Conran, Michael Conte, Caitlin Content, Vincent de Quattro, David Deuber, Jeff Doran, Russell Earl, Eric Enderton, Jeff Ertl, Gonzalo Escudero, Leandro Estebecorena, Tom Fejes, Dean Foster, Christian Foucher, David Fuhrer, Todd Fulford, Jennifer German, Jeremy Goldman, John K. Goodman, Adrian Graham, Matthieu Grospirion, Andrew Hardaway, Pablo Helman, John Helms, Neil Herzinger, Kela Hicks, Christina Hills, David Hisanaga, David Horsley, Christopher Horvath, Peg Hunter, Polly Ing, Erich Ippen, Sandra Karpman, Louis Katz, Steve Kennedy, Russell Koonce, Mitch Kopelman, Ed Kramer, Brian la France, Jeroen Lapre, Mohen Leo, Joshua Levine, Lyndon Li, Alex Lindsay, Craig Lyn, Simon Maddocks, Tia Marshall, Kevin May, Jennifer McKnew, Kerry Miller, Michael Min, Daryl Munton, Julie Neary, Patrick Neary, Kenneth Nielsen, Khatsho Orfali, David Parrish, Edward Pasquarello, Mary Payne, Ellen Poon, Scott Prior, Ricardo Ramos, Philippe Rebours, Kevin Reuter, Max Rocchetti, Alan Rosenfield, Tom Rosseter, Jonathan Rothbart, Barry Safley, Frederic Schmidt, Durant Schoon, Dan Shumaker, Jeff Shank, Paul Sharpe, Linda Siegel, Douglas J. Smith, Brian Sorbo, Christa Starr, David Stephens, Chris Stillman, John Stillman, Russ Sueyoshi, Catherine Tate, Tim Teramoto, Eric Texier, Marc Toscano, Alex Tropiec, Hans Uhlig, Eric Voegels, John Walker, Andy Wang, Robert Weaver, Susan Weeks, David Weitzberg, Colie Wertz, Ken Wesley, Melva Young, Dean Yurke, Ken Ziegler, Rita Zimmerman </p>

<p> The Phantom Menace was released in theaters on May 19, 1999, almost 16 years after the premiere of Return of the Jedi. The film's premiere was extensively covered by media and was widely anticipated because of the large cultural following the Star Wars saga had cultivated. Upon its release, The Phantom Menace received mixed reviews from critics. While the visual effects were praised, criticism was largely focused on its exposition and characters—particularly Jar Jar Binks. The film was a box-office success and broke numerous records. It grossed $924 million worldwide during its initial theatrical run, becoming the highest-grossing film of 1999, the second-highest-grossing film of all-time, and the third-highest in North America (behind Titanic and Star Wars), as well as the highest-grossing Star Wars film at the time (not factoring in inflation). The film has been re-released several times, including a 2012 3D reissue which brought its overall worldwide gross to over $1 billion. Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005) followed The Phantom Menace, rounding out the Star Wars prequel trilogy. </p>

<p> The Trade Federation has disrupted order in the Galactic Republic by blockading the planet Naboo in secret preparation for a full-scale invasion. The Republic's leader, Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum, dispatches Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice, Obi-Wan Kenobi, to negotiate with Trade Federation Viceroy Nute Gunray. Darth Sidious, a Sith Lord and the Trade Federation's secret benefactor, orders the Viceroy to kill the Jedi and begin their invasion with an army of battle droids. Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan escape and flee to Naboo. Amid the invasion, Qui-Gon rescues a bumbling Gungan outcast, Jar Jar Binks. Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan fail to persuade the Gungan leader Boss Nass to aid the planet's surface dwellers but manage to obtain Jar Jar's guidance and underwater transport to Theed, the capital city of Naboo. After rescuing Queen Padmé Amidala, the group makes their escape from Naboo aboard her Royal Starship, intending to reach the Republic capital planet of Coruscant. </p>

<p> The ship is damaged passing through the Federation blockade, and the group lands for repairs on the outlying desert planet of Tatooine, situated beyond the Republic's jurisdiction. Qui-Gon, Jar Jar, astromech droid R2-D2, and Padmé—disguised as one of her handmaidens—visit the settlement of Mos Espa to purchase a new part for the hyperdrive. They encounter a junk dealer, Watto, and his nine-year-old slave Anakin Skywalker, a gifted pilot and engineer who has built a protocol droid, C-3PO. Qui-Gon senses a strong presence of the Force within Anakin and is convinced that he is the prophesied "Chosen One," who is destined to restore balance to the Force. With Watto refusing to accept payment in Republic currency, Qui-Gon wagers both the required hyperdrive part and Anakin's freedom on a podrace. Anakin wins the race and joins the group to be trained as a Jedi, leaving behind his mother, Shmi. En route to their starship, Qui-Gon is attacked by Darth Maul, Sidious's apprentice, who was sent to capture Amidala. After a brief lightsaber duel, Qui-Gon escapes onboard the starship with the others. </p>

<p> Natalie Portman as Padmé Amidala, the fourteen-year-old Queen of Naboo, who hopes to protect her planet from the Trade Federation's blockade invasion. Throughout most of the film, she uses her birth name Padmé Naberrie and poses as one of the queen's handmaidens for protection. Over 200 actresses auditioned for the role.[7] The production notes stated that "The role required a young woman who could be believable as the ruler of that planet, but at the same time be vulnerable and open". He stated, "I was looking for someone who was young, strong, along the lines of Leia [and] Natalie embodied all those traits and more".[5] Portman was unfamiliar with Star Wars before being cast,[5] but was enthusiastic about being cast as a character she expected to become a role model. Portman said, "It was wonderful playing a young queen with so much power. I think it will be good for young women to see a strong woman of action who is also smart and a leader."[8] </p>

<p> Frank Oz as Yoda, the centuries-old Jedi Grandmaster and head of the Jedi Council who is apprehensive about allowing Anakin to be trained. Yoda was mostly portrayed as a puppet designed by Nick Dudman based on Stuart Freeborn's original design. Oz controlled the puppet's mouth, and other parts were controlled by puppeteers using remote controls.[11] Lucas fitted Yoda's filming around Oz's schedule as he finished and promoted In & Out.[15] A computer-generated Yoda is featured in two distant shots. Warwick Davis (who played the part of the Ewok Wicket W. Warrick in Return of the Jedi in 1983) portrays him in the scene where Obi-Wan becomes a Jedi Knight.[16] Lucas said he originally wanted to use a full-time digital Yoda, but the attempts did not work well enough at the time. Beginning with the 2011 Blu-ray release of The Phantom Menace, which was also used for the 3D reissue, a CG Yoda replaced the puppet entirely.[17] </p>

<p> Additionally, Brian Blessed voiced Boss Nass, the leader of the Gungan tribe who allies with the Naboo surface dwellers; Andy Secombe voiced Watto, a junk dealer on Tatooine who owns Anakin and his mother as slaves; and Lewis MacLeod voiced Sebulba, an aggressive, scheming podracer who is Anakin's main rival at the Boonta Eve podrace. Greg Proops and Scott Capurro voiced Fode and Beed, respectively, the two-headed announcer of the Boonta Eve Race. Alan Ruscoe appears as Jedi Master Plo Koon and Neimoidian Daultay Dofine, commander of the Trade Federation's droid control ships. Ralph Brown plays Ric Olie, commander of the Naboo Royal Space Fighter Corps and chief pilot aboard Queen Amidala's starship, while Matthew Wood appears as the Twi'lek Bib Fortuna alongside a CGI Jabba the Hutt, who is voiced by Scott Schumann. Dominic West plays the role of Jerus Jannick a Naboo Palace Guard, Celia Imrie appears as a fighter pilot, and Sofia Coppola appears as Saché, one of Amidala's handmaidens. Christian Simpson appears as Lieutenant Gavyn Sykes.[25] Lindsay Duncan voices TC-14, a protocol droid on the Federation ship.[26] Sally Hawkins made her screen debut as an uncredited villager.[27] </p>

<p> Throughout the 1980s, Lucas said he had no desire to return to Star Wars and had canceled his sequel trilogy by the time of Return of the Jedi. However, because Lucas had developed most of the backstory, the idea of prequels continued to fascinate him.[34] In the early 1990s, Star Wars saw a resurgence in popularity in the wake of Dark Horse's comic line and Timothy Zahn's trilogy of novels. Lucas saw that there was still a large audience for his idea of a prequel trilogy, and with the development of special effects generated with computer-generated imagery (CGI), Lucas considered returning to his saga and directing the film.[35] In October 1993, it was announced in Variety and other sources that he would be making the prequels.[36] Lucas began outlining the story; Anakin Skywalker rather than Obi-Wan Kenobi would be the protagonist, and the series would be a tragedy examining Darth Vader's origins. A relic of the original outline was that Anakin would, like his son, grow up on Tatooine.[37] Lucas also began to change the prequels' timeline relative to the original series; instead of filling in the tangential history, they would form the beginning of a long story that started with Anakin's childhood and ended with his death. This was the final step toward turning the franchise into a saga.[38] </p>

<p> The larger budget and possibilities opened up by the use of digital effects made Lucas "think about a much grander, more epic scale—which is what I wanted Star Wars to be".[42] The story ended with five simultaneous, ongoing plots, one leading to another. The central plot is Palpatine's intent to become Chancellor, which leads to the Trade Federation's attack on Naboo, the Jedi being sent there, Anakin being met along the way, and the rise of the Sith Lords. As with the original trilogy, Lucas intended The Phantom Menace to illustrate several themes throughout the narrative. Duality is a frequent theme; Amidala is a queen who passes as a handmaiden, Palpatine plays on both sides of the war, among others. "Balance" is frequently suggested; Anakin is supposedly "the one" chosen to bring balance to the Force—Lucas said, "Anakin needed to have a mother, Obi-Wan needed a Master, Darth Sidious needed an apprentice" as without interaction and dialogue, "you wouldn't have drama".[43] </p>

<p> Within three to four months of Lucas beginning the writing process, Chiang and his design team started a two-year process of reviewing thousands of designs for the film.[48] Chiang stated that Lucas intended Episode I to be stylistically different from the other Star Wars films; it would be "richer and more like a period piece, since it was the history leading up to A New Hope." The story takes place on three planets, some with varied environments such as the human and Gungan cities of Naboo and three buildings in Coruscant. With the exception of the Gungan city, which had an Art Nouveau-inspired visual, these locations would be given distinctive looks with some basis in the real world. The concept drawings of Ralph McQuarrie for the original trilogy served as the basis for Mos Espa—which was also inspired by old Tunisian hotels and buildings and had touches such as a marketplace to differentiate it from A New Hope's Mos Eisley—and Coruscant, in particular a metropolis design that became the basis for the Senate.[49] Bocquet would later develop the work of Chiang's team and design the interiors, translating the concepts into construction blueprints with environments and architectural styles that had some basis in reality "to give the audience something to key into."[50] Some elements were directly inspired by the original trilogy; Lucas described the battle droids as predecessors to the stormtroopers. Chiang uses that orientation to base the droids on the Imperial soldiers, only in the same style of stylized and elongated features seen in tribal African art.[42] </p>

<p> Stunt coordinator Nick Gillard was recruited to create a new Jedi fighting style for the prequel trilogy. Gillard likened the lightsaber battles to a chess game "with every move being a check". Because of their short-range weapons, Gillard thought that the Jedi would have had to develop a fighting style that merged every sword fighting style, such as kendo and other kenjutsu styles, with other swinging techniques, such as tennis swings and tree-chopping. While training Liam Neeson and Ewan McGregor, Gillard wrote a sequence that lasted around 60 seconds and intended to be around five or six sequences per fight.[54] Lucas later referred to the Jedi as "negotiators" rather than high-casualty soldiers. The preference of hand-to-hand combat was intended to give a spiritual and intellectual role to the Jedi.[54] Because Gillard thought that the stunt jumps with the actors and stuntmen dangling from wires did not look realistic, air rams were used to propel them into the air instead.[55] </p>

<p> Lucas decided to make elaborate costumes, because the film's society was more sophisticated than the one depicted in the original trilogy. Designer Trisha Biggar and her team created over 1,000 costumes that were inspired by various cultures.[56] Biggar worked closely with concept designer Iain McCaig to create a color palette for the inhabitants of each world: Tatooine followed A New Hope with sun-bleached sand colors, Coruscant had grays, browns and blacks, and Naboo had green and gold for humans while Gungans wore "a leathery look, like their skin". The Jedi costumes followed the tradition from the original film;[57] Obi-Wan's costume was inspired by the costume that was worn by Guinness. Lucas said he and Biggar would look at the conceptual art to "translat[e] all of these designs into cloth and fabric and materials that would actually work and not look silly". Biggar also consulted Gillard to ensure that the costumes would accommodate action scenes, and consulted the creature department to find which fabrics "wouldn't wear too heavily" on the alien skins. A huge wardrobe department was set up at Leavesden Film Studios to create over 250 costumes for the main actors and 5,000 for the background ones.[58] </p>

<p> After Samuel L. Jackson expressed interest in appearing in a Star Wars film, he was approached by casting director Robin Gurland to play Mace Windu.[9] Rapper Tupac Shakur was also considered for the role of Mace Windu.[63] Ray Park, a martial arts champion with experience in gymnastics and sword fighting, was originally a member of the stunt crew.[9] Stunt coordinator Nick Gillard filmed Park to demonstrate his conception of the lightsaber battles. Lucas and McCallum were so impressed with the test tape that they gave Park the role of Maul. His voice was considered "too squeaky" and was dubbed over in post-production by Peter Serafinowicz.[11] Keira Knightley's parents tried to convince her not to audition, but she still sought a role since she was a Star Wars fan.[64] The casting was influenced by Knightley's remarkable similarity to Natalie Portman, with Knightley admitting their mothers could not tell them apart.[65] Knightley was reported to have "cried every single day" due to finding the wardrobe uncomfortable.[64] </p>

<p> Silas Carson was cast as Nute Gunray because another actor was uncomfortable with the costumes used by the Trade Federation characters, which were hot, exerted a lot of pressure on the bearer, and took about 15 minutes to apply. Hugh Quarshie considered the part of Panaka as "a good career move" and a production that would be fun to make.[72] Brian Blessed originally auditioned for the role of Sio Bibble, the Governor of Naboo,[73] for which he was considered "too loud".[74] Casting director Robin Gurland approached him to play Nass because it was a "bigger than life" character with "a kind of bravado".[75] Blessed described Nass as a "reluctant hero".[74] Sofia Coppola, daughter of Lucas' long-time friend and creative partner Francis Ford Coppola, considers Lucas as "like an uncle to me". As she prepared the script for her directorial debut The Virgin Suicides, Coppola heard Lucas would be making a new Star Wars film and asked him if she could accompany him during filming. Lucas offered Coppola a role in the royal entourage, which she accepted because it "seemed like a good vantage point to watch without getting in the way".[76] </p>

<p> Until the film's production, many special effects in the film industry were achieved using miniature models, matte paintings and on-set visual effects—although other films had made extensive use of CGI. Knoll previewed 3,500 storyboards for the film; Lucas accompanied him to explain factors of the shots that would be practical and those that would be created through visual effects. Knoll later said that on hearing the explanations of the storyboards, he did not know how to accomplish what he had seen. The result was a mixture of original techniques and the newest digital techniques to make it difficult for the viewer to guess which technique was being used. Knoll and his visual effects team wrote new computer software, including cloth simulators to allow a realistic depiction of the digital characters' clothing, to create certain shots. Another goal was to create computer-generated characters that could act seamlessly with live-action actors. While filming scenes with CGI characters, Lucas would block the characters using their corresponding voice actors on-set. The voice actors were then removed and the live-action actors would perform the same scene alone. A CGI character would later be added into the shot to complete the conversation.[92] Lucas also used CGI to correct the physical presence of actors in certain scenes.[61] Practical models were used when their visuals helped with miniature sceneries for backgrounds, set extensions and model vehicles that would be scanned to create the digital models or filmed to represent spaceships and podraces.[93] </p>

<p> The Jedi practice Zen-like meditation and martial arts, as did the ancient Japanese Samurai warriors. The name "Qui-Gon" adapts the term qigong, which refers to a Chinese discipline involving meditation and cultivation of the flow of the vital energy called "qi" for healing, health, and combat. The words qi (Chinese), gi (Korean), ki (Japanese), and the Indian term "Prana" all refer to the energy that is thought to flow through all living things, from the source of all qi (or power), which is "The Way" or "The Tao" in Chinese philosophy. In Taoist philosophy, from The Way, yin and yang—the opposing but complementary aspects of reality or nature—are born. Unlike Chinese philosophy, in which yin and yang are not moral qualities, the ancient Persian philosophy of Zurvanism taught that the dualism of dark and light forces are locked in an eternal battle while being two sides (or evolutes) of the same "Force", the force of time itself (Zurvan)—the prime mover. These elements derive primarily from Eastern and Iranian religions and myths.[97] </p>

<p> As with other Star Wars films, themes about family and hope are featured prominently. In the Disney Gallery: The Mandalorian episode "Legacy", Dave Filoni explains that the use of "Duel of the Fates" during the lightsaber duel between Darth Maul against Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi represents the fight for the fate of Anakin Skywalker. According to Filoni, Qui-Gon Jinn acts like a father figure towards Anakin because he feels he needs one after taking him from his mother, having realized that the Jedi shouldn't be opposed to love and care. In the end, Qui-Gon dies, and thus Anakin loses his father figure; Obi-Wan Kenobi ultimately becomes his master to honor Jinn's dying wish despite his initial contempt for him, and while he comes to eventually see him like a brother as shown in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, he doesn't act like a father, which coupled with the Jedi's indifference, seals Anakin's fate.[101] </p>

<p> As with previous Star Wars films, Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace's score was composed and conducted by John Williams. He started composing the score in October 1998 and began recording the music with the London Voices and London Symphony Orchestra at Abbey Road Studios on February 10, 1999. Williams decided to use electronic instruments such as synthesizers to enhance the sound and choral pieces to "capture the magical, mystical force that a regular orchestra might not have been able to provide", and create an atmosphere that was "more mysterious and mystical and less military" than those of the original trilogy.[102] One of the most notable tracks is "Duel of the Fates", which uses the chorus to give a religious, temple-like feel to the epic lightsaber duel. The track was made into a music video.[103] While composing Anakin's theme, Williams tried to reflect the innocence of his childhood and to foreshadow his transformation into Darth Vader by using slight suggestions of "The Imperial March" in the melody.[102] </p>

<p> The first teaser trailer was released on selected screens accompanying Meet Joe Black on November 17, 1998,[109][c] and media reported that people were paying full admission at theaters to see the trailer. Other films that played this trailer included The Waterboy, The Siege and A Bug's Life.[111] To keep fans from leaving before the movie was over, some theaters played the teaser an additional time after the film finished.[112] The second trailer debuted on March 12, 1999, in front of Wing Commander's theatrical screenings.[113] Again, many fans paid full theater admission to watch the new trailer.[114] A bootlegged version of the preview was leaked to the Internet the same day.[115] The next morning, the trailer was released on the film's official website and shortly afterwards the servers became overloaded.[116] This trailer had over 1 million downloads within its first 24 hours of release, setting a record for the most downloaded trailer at the time.[117][118] It would hold this record for a year until it was surpassed by The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring in April 2000.[119][120] The theatrical trailer caused even more media attention because it was premiered in theaters and screened at the ShoWest Convention in Las Vegas,[121] and was aired on Entertainment Tonight and Access Hollywood.[115] </p>

<p> The release of the first new Star Wars film in 16 years was accompanied by a considerable amount of attention.[130] According to The Wall Street Journal, so many workers announced plans to view the premiere that many companies closed on the opening day.[131] Queue areas formed outside cinema theaters over a month before ticket sales began.[132] More theater lines appeared when it was announced that cinemas were not allowed to sell tickets in advance until two weeks into the release. This was because of a fear that family theater-goers would be either unable to receive tickets or would be forced to pay higher prices for them. Instead, tickets were to be sold on a first-come-first-served basis.[133] However, after meetings with the National Association of Theatre Owners, Lucasfilm agreed to allow advance ticket sales on May 12, 1999, provided there was a limit of 12 tickets per customer.[134] As a result, some advance tickets were sold by scalpers at prices as high as US$100 apiece, which a distribution chief called "horrible" and said was exactly what they wanted to avoid.[135] Daily Variety reported that theater owners received strict instructions from Lucasfilm that the film could only play in the cinema's largest auditorium for the first 8–12 weeks, no honor passes were allowed for the first eight weeks, and they were obliged to send their payments to distributor 20th Century Fox within seven days.[136] </p>

<p> Despite worries about the film being finished on time, two weeks before its theatrical release, Lucasfilm moved the release date from May 21 to 19, 1999. At the ShoWest Convention, Lucas said the change was intended to give the fans a "head start" by allowing them to view it during the week and allowing families to view it during weekends. Eleven charity premieres were staged across the United States on May 16, 1999; receipts from the Los Angeles event, where corporate packages were available for between US$5,000 and US$25,000; proceeds were donated to the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation.[137] Other charity premieres included the Dallas premiere for the Children's Medical Center, the Aubrey Fund for Pediatric Cancer Research at the Sloan-Kettering Hospital in New York, the Big Brother/Sister Association of the Philadelphia premiere, and the Children's National Medical Center in Washington, D.C. A statement said that tickets were sold at US$500 apiece and that certain sections of the theaters were set aside for disadvantaged children.[138] </p>

<p> The film opened at 12:01 am on Wednesday, May 19, 1999, in 2,010 theaters in the United States and Canada. An additional 960 theaters screened the film later in the day. About 120 theaters showed the film continuously on opening day, including the Ziegfeld Theatre in New York City and the Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles.[140] Foreshadowing his future conversion to digital cinematography, Lucas said the film would be released on four digital projectors (two in New York and two in Los Angeles) on June 18, 1999.[141] Few film studios released films during the same week: DreamWorks and Universal Studios released The Love Letter on May 21 and Notting Hill on May 28, respectively.[142] The Love Letter was a commercial failure but Notting Hill fared better and followed The Phantom Menace closely in second place.[143] Employment consultant firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas estimated that 2.2 million full-time employees missed work to attend the film, resulting in a US$293 million loss of productivity.[144] </p>

<p> A year later on June 19, 2001, it was announced that The Phantom Menace would become the first Star Wars film to be officially released on DVD, in a slightly extended cut from the theatrical releases.[147] This THX certified two-disc DVD release debuted on October 16 of the same year.[148] The first disc contains the film and the second disc contains special features. On the first disc, there are three randomized selected menus themed to the planets Naboo, Tatooine and Coruscant.[149] There is an Easter egg located in the options menu. When the THX Optimizer is highlighted, the viewer can press 1-1-3-8. By doing this, some bloopers and DVD credits will be shown.[150] The special features include seven deleted scenes completed specifically for the DVD, a commentary track featuring Lucas and producer Rick McCallum, and several documentaries—including a full-length documentary entitled The Beginning: Making Episode I.[149][151] There are also DVD-ROM features, including trailers for Attack of the Clones.[152] </p>

<p> Upon its DVD premiere on October 16, 2001, The Phantom Menace competed with other major DVD titles that were released that month, including Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs and The Godfather trilogy.[153] It became the fastest-selling DVD title of all time in the United States with 2.2 million copies being sold in its first week after release.[154][155] This surpassed the previous record briefly held by The Mummy Returns two weeks prior, which sold 2 million copies within its first week.[156] Less than a month later, The Phantom Menace's record for being the fastest-selling DVD was taken by Shrek when it sold 2.5 million copies in its first three days.[157] The Phantom Menace was one of the only four films to sell over 2 million DVD copies during their first weeks of release at the time, with the others being The Mummy Returns, Shrek and How the Grinch Stole Christmas.[158] The film would overall earn $45 million from its first week DVD sales, more than the theatrical releases of From Hell, Riding in Cars with Boys, Training Day and other post-9/11 films.[154] </p>

<p> Conversely, Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave it three-and-a-half stars out of four and called it "an astonishing achievement in imaginative filmmaking" and said, "Lucas tells a good story." Ebert also wrote that, "If some of the characters are less than compelling, perhaps that's inevitable" because it is the opening film in the new trilogy. He concluded his review by saying that rather than Star Trek films, filmmakers could "[g]ive me transparent underwater cities and vast hollow senatorial spheres any day".[194] Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a "B" grade and complimented Liam Neeson's performance and the action scenes.[195] In an Entertainment Weekly review for the DVD release, Marc Bernardin gave the film a "C−", calling it "haplessly plotted, horribly written, and juvenile".[196] ReelViews' James Berardinelli wrote, "Looking at the big picture, in spite of all its flaws, The Phantom Menace is still among the best 'bang for a buck' fun that can be had in a movie theater," and said the film was a "distinct improvement" over Return of the Jedi.[197] In 2024, Brian Lowry of CNN praised the film for its "duel of fates" between Darth Maul, Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan, the Emperor's long game of how the Sith were to outmaneuver the Jedi and the digital effects.[198] </p>

<p> Andrew Johnston of Time Out New York wrote, "Let's face it: no film could ever match the expectations some have for Episode I – The Phantom Menace. Which isn't to say it's a disappointment: on the contrary, it's awesomely entertaining, provided you accept it on its own terms ... Like the original film, it's a Boy's Own adventure yarn with a corny but irresistible spiritual subtext. The effects and production design are stunning, but they always serve the story, not the other way around."[199] Susan Wloszczyna of USA Today said that the film does "plenty right" and praised the characters Darth Maul and Watto.[200] David Cornelius of efilmcritic.com said that the film's better moments "don't merely balance out the weaker ones—they topple them".[201] Colin Kennedy of Empire magazine said that despite problems with pacing and writing, "there is still much pleasure to be had watching our full-blown Jedi guides in action". He praised the visuals and Liam Neeson's performance and said that the duel between Darth Maul and the Jedi is "the saga's very best lightsaber battle".[202] </p>

<p> Empire magazine ranked The Phantom Menace on its list of "500 Greatest Movies of All Time",[203] while Entertainment Weekly and Comcast included the film on their lists of the worst movie sequels.[204][205] James Berardinelli wrote, "The Phantom Menace was probably the most overhyped motion picture of the last decade (if not longer), and its reputation suffered as a result of its inability to satisfy unreasonable expectations."[206] William Arnold of the Seattle Post-Intelligencer agreed that the film's massive hype caused many of the negative reactions, saying, "it built expectations that can't possibly be matched and scuttled [the] element of storytelling surprise". He also said that the film was "well made and entertaining" and was much better than similar box office fare released around that year, such as The Mummy and The Matrix.[207] Ewan McGregor said in 2002 that he was "slightly disappointed" that the film was "kind of flat" and believed the next film in the franchise would have "much more humor and...color."[208] </p>

<p> There has been some controversy over whether several alien characters reflect racial stereotypes. For example, the oafish, slow-witted Jar Jar Binks has long droopy ears reminiscent of dreadlocks and spoke with what many perceived as a Caribbean patois reminiscent of Jamaican Creole.[212] Andrew Howe rejects most such connections, arguing that only Jar Jar's accent links him to the Caribbean and no other factor.[213] However, Nicholas Wanberg argues that linguistic analysis of Jar Jar's accent shows no common features with Caribbean English save those it also shares with American English,[214] although he concedes that Jar Jar is constructed with tropes typical of ethnically stereotyped characters.[215] Similarly, Drew Grant describes the character as "[s]ervile and cowardly ... a black minstrel-ish stereotype on par with Stepin Fetchit."[193] Georgetown University professor of African-American studies Michael Eric Dyson says that the entire Gungan species seems suggestive of a primitive African tribe, with Boss Nass portrayed as "a fat, bumbling ... caricature of a stereotypical African tribal chieftain."[189] The greedy and corrupt Neimoidians of the Trade Federation have been noted as resembling East Asian stereotypes,[216] and the unprincipled trader Watto has been interpreted as a Jewish stereotype reminiscent of Charles Dickens' character Fagin.[217] Lucas has denied all of these implications,[189] instead criticizing the American media for using opinions from the Internet as a reliable source for news stories. Lucas added that it reflects more the racism of the commenters than it does the movie;[218] however, animator Rob Coleman said ahead of the film's release that Watto's mannerisms were inspired by footage of Alec Guinness as Fagin in Oliver Twist.[219] </p>

<p> Even though it received mixed reviews, The Phantom Menace was a financial success, breaking many box office records in its debut, and beating out The Mummy by taking number 1. The film broke The Lost World: Jurassic Park's records for the largest single-day gross for taking more than $28 million in the opening day and fastest to gross $100 million in five days. Additionally, it grossed $64.8 million in its opening weekend, the second highest ever at the time, behind The Lost World: Jurassic Park.[220] It also became the quickest film to reach the $200 million and $300 million marks, surpassing Independence Day (1996) and Titanic (1997), respectively.[221][222] The Phantom Menace held both records before Spider-Man took them in 2002.[223][224] It would go on to earn $105.7 million, making it the highest five-day Wednesday opening weekend of all time.[220] The film had the biggest opening weekend for any 20th Century Fox film for two years until 2001 when it was taken by Planet of the Apes.[225] Its opening day record was handed to Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone that same year.[226] Two years later in 2003, The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King surpassed The Phantom Menace for having the largest Wednesday gross, as well as the highest five-day Wednesday opening weekend.[227] During its second weekend, The Phantom Menace made $51.3 million, making it the highest-grossing second weekend at the time, surpassing Jurassic Park. The film would hold this record until it was surpassed a year later by How the Grinch Stole Christmas.[228] In total, the film stayed at the top of the box office for three weeks until it was overtaken by Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me during its fourth weekend.[229] The Phantom Menace was 1999's most successful film, staying in the Top 10 until August 5 (11 weeks total), earning $431.1 million in the United States and Canada.[230] Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 84.8 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.[231] </p>

<p> The film set an opening record in Japan, grossing $12.2 million in its first two days from 403 screens.[232] In the UK, the film also set an opening record with £9.5 million in its opening weekend (including previews), surpassing Men in Black.[233][234] It would go on to hold this record for a few months until it was taken by Toy Story 2 in early 2000.[235] The Phantom Menace also grossed a record $11 million in its opening weekend in Germany.[236] Outside the United States and Canada, the film grossed over $10 million in Australia ($25.9 million), Brazil ($10.4 million), France and Algeria ($43 million), Germany ($53.9 million), Italy ($12.9 million), Japan ($109.9 million), Mexico ($12 million), Spain ($25 million), and the United Kingdom and Ireland ($81.9 million).[237] Its overseas total was $493.2 million, taking its worldwide total to $924.3 million.[230] At that time, the film was the third-highest-grossing film in North America behind Titanic and Star Wars (1977),[238] and the second-highest-grossing film worldwide behind Titanic without adjusting for inflation of ticket prices.[239] </p>

<p> After its 3D re-release in 2012, the worldwide box office gross exceeded $1 billion,[240] making it the first Star Wars film and the 11th film in history—excluding inflation—to do so.[240][241] Although in the intervening years, the film had lost some of its rankings in the lists of highest-grossing films, the 3D re-release returned it to the worldwide all-time Top 10 for several months.[242] In North America, its revenues overtook those of the original Star Wars as the saga's highest-grossing film when not adjusting for inflation of ticket prices, and is the tenth-highest-grossing film in North America as of August 2017[update].[243] In North America, its ranking on the Adjusted for Ticket Price Inflation list climbed to 16th place—one place behind Return of the Jedi.[244] The 3D re-release, which premiered in February 2012, earned $43 million—$22.5 million of which was in North America—worldwide.[245] The 3D re-release earned US$102,727,119 worldwide—including $43.5 million in North America—and has increased the film's overall box office takings to $474.5 million domestically, and $552.5 million in other territories.[241] The 25th anniversary re-release debuted in second place at the U.S. and Canadian box office behind The Fall Guy with $8.8 million and grossed an additional $6.4 million internationally, bringing its weekend total to $14.5 million worldwide.[246] </p>

<p> Since the release of The Phantom Menace, many people who have worked on the Star Wars films and viewers have defended the prequel trilogy.[266] Ewan McGregor said that his opinion of the prequels improved as he met fans who grew up with them and "realized how important our films have been to them", stating that critics "just wanted to feel like they were seven or eight again, and they didn't get that," and defending how George Lucas attempted to do something different rather than just "make another three Star Wars films that felt like the original ones".[267][268] Such a point of view was reflected by Richard Newby of The Hollywood Reporter, on the 20th anniversary of The Phantom Menace, who acknowledged that "the film didn't live up to the lofty expectations that many fans of the original trilogy held for 16 years", but that the fan backlash never changed his own appreciation of the film, that he first saw as a child and even as Newby started to notice the film's flaws as he grew up, "they expanded the Star Wars universe in a way that kept me interested."[269] Hayden Christensen, who plays Anakin Skywalker in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, reflected that by going back to the character as a child in The Phantom Menace, "George Lucas subverted our expectations and understanding of this character" and made it a good starting point for Anakin's character development throughout the trilogy.[270][271][272] In a 2018 Saturday Night Live comedy rap video, Natalie Portman dresses up as Queen Amidala and threatens an interviewer who tries to mock the prequels.[273] </p>

<p> Many members of the prequel production team have defended the character of Jar Jar Binks and its portrayer Ahmed Best. In an interview with Andy Cohen, Liam Neeson said that he was proud of his involvement with the film, and expressed how he was distressed at the backlash at Best, "one of the funniest and most talented guys [he's] ever worked with."[274][275] Visual effects supervisor John Knoll reflected that "George took a lot of the criticism pretty harshly", down to reducing Jar Jar's role in the following two movies, and that he was happy to see Best received with a standing ovation at the 2019 edition of Star Wars Celebration.[266] Animation director Rob Coleman said that twenty years later he still has younger people coming up to him and telling him that Jar Jar is their favorite character,[266] and digital model designer Jean Bolte, who cited Jar Jar Binks as one of her favorite characters to work with alongside Sebulba and Yoda, added that "seeing and hearing the fans so interested in which one was our contribution…. It really completely changed my point of view about being privileged to have had anything to do with these films."[266][276][277] Best himself said he was moved by the newfound appreciation given the previous backlash, adding that it was possible because for the ones who saw the movie as children, "the prequels, that's theirs, and they defend the prequels. So I see the same thing. I see the resurgence of The Phantom Menace."[266][277] </p>

<p> The opening crawl reveals that the Trade Federation has blockaded the planet of Naboo in hope of resolving a galactic trade dispute. Chancellor Valorum of the Galactic Republic secretly sends two Jedi Knights — Qui-Gon Jinn and his padawan learner Obi-Wan Kenobi — to meet with the Trade Federation to settle the crisis. Unknownst to them, the Trade Federation is in league with the mysterious Sith Lord Darth Sidious, who orders them to invade Naboo and kill the two Jedi. Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan escape and flee to the surface of Naboo, where they meet local Gungan outcast Jar Jar Binks. As Jar Jar brings them to an underwater Gungan settlement, the Trade Federation captures Naboo's leader, Queen Amidala. Through a Jedi mind trick, Qui-Gon secures a submarine, which Obi-Wan, Jar Jar, and he use to reach the capital of Naboo and rescue Queen Amidala and her escorts. Afterwards, they all depart for Coruscant, the Galactic Republic’s capital planet, to seek help from the Senate. </p>

<p> During the escape, the ship is attacked by the Federation blockade, forcing R2-D2, one of the ship's droids, to fix the shields. The attack damages the ship's hyperdrive, forcing the party to land on the desert planet of Tatooine for repairs. While searching for needed parts, Qui-Gon and a handmaiden named Padmé befriend young Anakin Skywalker, a nine-year-old human slave gifted in piloting and mechanics. Qui-Gon senses a strong presence of the Force in Anakin, and feels that he may be the Chosen One—an individual the Jedi believe will fulfill a prophecy by bringing balance to the Force. At Anakin's insistence, Qui-Gon enters Anakin into the Boonta Eve Podrace in a bid with Anakin's master, Watto, to gain the needed parts as well as Anakin's freedom. Anakin eludes several obstacles — including rival racer Sebulba — to win the race, gaining his freedom and bankrupting Watto. After hesitation, Anakin leaves his mother and his droid (C-3PO) behind on Tatooine to go with the Jedi. As the group prepares to depart, they are attacked by the Sith apprentice Darth Maul, who battles Qui-Gon until the heroes escape. On Coruscant, Qui-Gon informs the Jedi Council of the mysterious, well-trained attacker. The Council becomes concerned that this may indicate the reappearance of the Sith, a religious order who followed the dark side of the Force. Qui-Gon then requests from the Council about Anakin, hoping that he can be trained as a Jedi. After testing the boy, the Council refuses, worried that he is too sensitive to the fear and anger that he harbors will cloud his future. Meanwhile, Senator Palpatine of Naboo persuades Amidala to call a vote of no confidence in Chancellor Valorum. The vote removes Valorum from power and leads to Palpatine's nomination for the position, which Amidala considers too late to work. To stop the Federation invasion by herself, the Queen decides to return to Naboo with her security team, the two Jedi, R2-D2, Anakin and Jar Jar. </p>

<p> On Naboo, Padmé reveals herself as the real Queen Amidala and forms an alliance with the Gungans for the battle against the Trade Federation. The Gungans march into battle to divert the Federation army away from the capital, allowing the others to infiltrate the palace and capture the Viceroy. Once inside the palace hangar, the Jedi free several Naboo pilots, who regain their starfighters and assault the Federation droid ship. As they make their way to the throne room, the infiltration team is confronted by Darth Maul. Qui-Gon and Obi Wan fight Maul, while the others take an alternate route. Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan duel with the Sith Lord amongst the catwalks of a massive power-generating reactor core. Obi-Wan is briefly delayed, separating him from Qui-Gon and Maul. Meanwhile, Queen Amidala and her forces fight their way into the palace and capture Nute Gunray. Anakin—inadvertently joining the dogfight in space—destroys the droid-control ship reactor with proton torpedoes, which deactivates the droid army in the midst of taking Gungan prisoners. In the reactor core, Qui-Gon reengages Darth Maul single-handedly, but is slain. Obi-Wan catches up and attacks Maul until he is forced over the edge of a deep ventilation shaft. While clinging to the ledge, Obi-Wan uses the Force to make a tremendous vertical leap, flipping over Maul while simultaneously recovering Qui-Gon's lightsaber and slicing the Sith Lord in half. With his final breath, Qui-Gon instructs Obi-Wan to train Anakin to become a Jedi. </p>

<p> Filming began June 26, 1997 and ended on September 30, 1997, primarily taking place at Leavesden Studios in England, with additional location shooting in the Tunisian desert for the Tatooine scenes and the Italian palace Palazzo Reale, Caserta for the Theed City Naboo Palace interior. The city of Mos Espa was built in the desert outside Tozeur. The night following the third day of shooting in Tozeur, an unexpected sandstorm destroyed many sets and props. With a quick rescheduling to allow for repairs, production was able to leave Tunisia the exact day it had originally planned to.[7] Nine R2-D2 models were created; seven could run in the sand or on the stage, one was for Kenny Baker to be dropped into, and one was a "pneumatic" R2 that was able to shift from two to three legs. During filming in Tunisia and on sets to replicate the environment, the standard model was prone to skidding off in strange directions and having its motors lock up from the sand. Having confronted similar problems before, Lucas allowed two companies, Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) and the production's British special effects department, to create their own versions of the perfect R2-D2. The finished product needed to navigate deep sand, light sand and door jambs. ILM's R2-D2 featured two wheelchair motors capable of pushing 440 pounds (or 198 kilograms) of weight. The British effects company produced a new foot and motor drive system, allowing R2 to drive over sand. The ILM version was primarily used on stage sets, whereas the British version was used in Tunisia.[8] </p>

<p> Up until the production of The Phantom Menace, many special effects in the film industry were achieved by the use of miniature models, matte paintings, and on-set visual effects, although other films had made extensive use of computer-generated imagery. Visual effects supervisor John Knoll previewed 3,500 storyboards for the film, with Lucas accompanying him to explain what factors of the shots would be practical and what would be created through visual effects. Knoll later recounted that on hearing the explanations of the storyboards, he was unaware of any way to accomplish what he had seen. The result was to mix original techniques with the newest digital techniques to make it difficult for the viewer to guess which technique was being used. New computer software was written by Knoll and his visual effects team to create certain shots of in the film. Another goal was to create computer-generated characters that could act seamlessly with live-action actors. While filming scenes with CGI characters, Lucas would block the characters using their corresponding voice actor on-set. The voice actors were then removed and the live-action actors would perform the same scene alone. A CGI character would later be added into the shot, completing the conversation.[9] </p>

<p> The Phantom Menace received enormous media-created hype, which made Lucasfilm's $20 million advertising campaign, with the distinctive artwork of Star Wars series artist Drew Struzan gracing the movie poster and other advertising, seem modest and almost unnecessary because of the unprecedented interest amongst both fans and the wider community in the franchises return. Few film studios released films in the same week as the release of The Phantom Menace, among the more courageous were DreamWorks and Universal Studios releasing The Love Letter and Notting Hill, respectively. The Love Letter resulted in a box-office flop, whereas Notting Hill fared rather well and followed The Phantom Menace closely in second place.[10] Challenger, Gray & Christmas of Chicago, a work-issues consulting firm, estimated that 2.2 million full-time employees did not appear for work to see the film, resulting in $293 million in lost productivity. The Wall Street Journal reported that such a larger number of workers announced plans to view premiere screenings that many companies shut down on the premiere day.[11] Many fans began waiting outside cinema theaters as early as a month in advance of ticket sales.[12] </p>

<p> More theater lines appeared when it was announced that the film cinemas were not allowed to sell tickets in advance until two weeks into the release. This was done out of fear that family theater-goers would either be unable to receive tickets or would be forced to pay higher prices. Tickets were instead to be sold on a traditional first-come-first-serve basis.[13] However, after meetings with the National Association of Theater Owners, Lucasfilm agreed to allow advance ticket sales to be allowed on May 12, 1999 provided that there be a 12 ticket limit per one customer.[14] As a result however, some advance tickets were sold by "scalpers" as high as $100 apiece, which a distribution chief called "horrible", stating it was exactly what they wanted to avoid.[15] Daily Variety reported that theater owners received strict instructions from Lucasfilm that the film could only play in the cinema's largest auditorium for the first 8–12 weeks; no honor passes were allowed for the first eight weeks, and they were obligated to send their payments to distributor 20th Century Fox within seven days.[16] </p>

<p> Despite worries about whether the film would be finished in time, two weeks prior to its debut Lucasfilm Ltd. pushed the release date up from May 21, 1999 to May 19. The date marked the 22-year anniversary of the release of the original Star Wars film. At the ShoWest Convention, Lucas stated that the change was to give the fans a "head start" by allowing them to view it over the week and allowing families the chance to view on the weekends. In a nod toward his future with digital technology, Lucas stated that the film would be released on four digital projectors on June 18, 1999.[21] Eleven charity premieres were staged across the United States on May 16, 1999; receivings from the Los Angeles event were given to the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatrics AIDS Foundation with corporate packages available for $5,000-$25,000.[22] Other charity premieres included the Dallas premiere for Children's Medical Center, the Aubrey Fund for Pediatric Cancer Research at the Sloan-Kettering Hospital in New York, the Big Brother/Sister Assn. of the Philadelphia premiere, and the Children's National Medical Center in Washington D.C. A statement said that tickets were sold at $500 apiece and that certain sections were set aside for disadvantaged children.[23] </p>

<p> The Phantom Menace received mixed reviews with critics praising the action sequences, the visual effects and special effects and the score. The film has a score of 53% based on 228 reviews with an average score of 5.94/10 on Rotten Tomatoes.[24] Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave it three and a half stars, praising its visual effects and calling it "exhilarating".[25] Some aspects of the scripting were criticized. Much criticism was directed at the character of Jar Jar Binks, who was regarded by many members of the older fan community as a purely merchandising opportunity rather than a serious character in the film.[26] The introduction of midi-chlorians (microscopic organisms that allow communication with the Force) in the film has been controversial. Those against it have seen it as a concept that negates the numinous quality of the Force.[27] On the other hand, many fans and critics agree that the epic fight scene between Qui-Gon Jinn, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Darth Maul—showcasing astounding choreography and Ray Park's martial arts skills—is a high point, and one of the best lightsaber duels in the entire Star Wars saga.[28] </p>

<p> Despite failing to live up to immensely high expectations, The Phantom Menace accumulated box office records. Its opening-day earnings were more than $28 million, which was, at the time, the largest single-day gross for a single movie, although it failed to break the opening weekend record, then held by The Lost World: Jurassic Park. It was not until the 2001 film Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone was released that these numbers were greatly superseded.[32] The Phantom Menace went on to pass the $100 million mark in a record five days, breaking the record set by Lost World by 24 hours (the current record has since been reduced to just two days, by Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest). Maintaining its rapid income, it reached the $200 million mark in just 13 days, easily beating the previous record held by Independence Day by 7 1/2 days. The film took only 28 days to earn $300 million, beating Titanic's record by a 16-day margin. However, the film never generated a large number of repeat viewers to continue on to all-time top status.[32] </p>

<p> The DVD features a commentary track by writer-director George Lucas, producer Rick McCallum, editor Ben Burtt, animation director Rob Coleman, and visual effects supervisors John Knoll, Dennis Muren, and Scott Squires. It includes seven deleted scenes completed specifically for the DVD, and The Beginning: Making Episode I, an hour-long documentary film drawn from more than 600 hours of footage, including an insider's look at Lucasfilm and ILM during the production. The viewer can access a multi-angle storyboard-to-animatic-to-film segment featuring the submarine and podrace lap 1 sequences. The DVD includes two documentary sources, five featurettes exploring the storyline, design, costumes, visual effects, and fight sequences in the film, and an award-winning twelve-part web documentary series chronicling the production. A Duel of the Fates music video featuring John Williams was produced for the DVD, as well. The final special features included are a never-before-seen production photo gallery with a special caption feature, theatrical posters and print campaigns from around the world, a theatrical teaser and launch trailers, seven TV spots, Star Wars: Starfighter - The Making of a Game featurette from LucasArts, and a DVD-ROM weblink to exclusive Star Wars content. </p>

<p> Amidala's ship is unable to sustain its hyperdrive and lands for repairs on the desert planet Tatooine. Qui-Gon, Jar Jar, astromech droid R2-D2, and Amidala's handmaiden Padmé visit the settlement of Mos Espa to buy new parts at a junk shop. There they meet the shop's owner Watto and his nine-year-old slave Anakin Skywalker, who is a gifted Podracer pilot and engineer, and has created a protocol droid called C-3PO. Qui-Gon senses a strong presence of the Force within Anakin and is convinced that he is the "chosen one" of Jedi prophecy who will bring balance to the Force. Qui-Gon wagers Anakin's freedom with Watto in a Podrace, which Anakin wins. Anakin joins the group to be trained as a Jedi, leaving his mother Shmi behind. En route to their repaired starship, Qui-Gon enters a brief lightsaber duel with Darth Maul, Darth Sidious' Sith apprentice who was sent to capture Amidala. </p>

<p> On Naboo, Padmé reveals herself to the Gungans as Queen Amidala and persuades them into an alliance against the Trade Federation. Jar Jar leads his people in a battle against the droid army while Padmé leads the hunt for Gunray in Theed, eventually capturing him and his aide, Rune Haako. In a starship hangar, Anakin enters a vacant starfighter and inadvertently triggers its autopilot, joining the battle against the Federation droid control ship in space. Anakin ventures into the ship and destroys it from within, deactivating the droid army. Meanwhile, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan battle Darth Maul, who mortally wounds Qui-Gon before being bisected by Obi-Wan. As he dies, Qui-Gon asks Obi-Wan to train Anakin. Subsequently, Palpatine is elected as the new Supreme Chancellor and Gunray is formally arrested. The Jedi Council makes Obi-Wan a fully fledged Jedi Knight and reluctantly accepts Anakin as Obi-Wan's apprentice. At a festive ceremony, Padmé presents a gift of appreciation and friendship to the Gungans. </p>

<p> On the planet's surface, Qui-Gon saves native outcast Jar Jar Binks from being crushed by a Trade Federation MTT. Kenobi appears, pursued by STAPs, which are destroyed by Qui-Gon. Jar Jar Binks shows the two Jedi the way to an underwater Gungan settlement, Otoh Gunga. Meanwhile, the Trade Federation occupies Theed, the capital city of Naboo, and captures Queen Amidala along with the rest of the government. In Otoh Gunga, the Jedi meet the Gungan leader, Boss Nass, and ask him to help the people of Naboo, but Nass refuses due to hate of the people of Naboo and sends them off in a bongo submarine. They are attacked by an opee sea killer and a colo claw fish but both fish are eaten by a sando aqua monster. The Jedi, with Binks in tow, arrive in Theed and rescue Queen Amidala, using the Force and their lightsabers to dispatch squads of droids. They depart for Coruscant, the Galactic Republic's capital planet, to ask for help from the Senate. As they attempt to run the blockade, the queen's starship is damaged by Federation battleships, but an astromech droid named R2-D2 manages to repair it and they narrowly escape. </p>

<p> After a lengthy duel, Maul suddenly stuns Qui-Gon by hitting him on the chin with his lightsaber handle, then rams his blade straight into Qui-Gon's torso, mortally wounding him. Devastated and angered, Obi-Wan redoubles his assault upon Maul and chops the Sith's lightsaber in half, but Maul eventually overpowers and nearly kills Kenobi by Force pushing him over the edge of a seemingly bottomless reactor shaft. Obi-Wan saves himself from falling when he manages to grab onto a pipe protruding from the wall of the shaft. Maul kicks the Jedi's lightsaber into the pit and prepares to finish him off. After Obi-Wan calms himself, he uses the Force to leap out of the shaft and over Maul's head while summoning his fallen master's lightsaber to his hand. He lands behind the surprised Maul and cuts him in half; Maul's upper and lower body fall into the shaft. </p>

<p> The Phantom Menace was the first Star Wars film in 16 years. As a result, there was almost unprecedented interest amongst both fans and the wider public in the revival of the franchise. The film received enormous media-created hype, which made Lucasfilm's $20 million advertising campaign—with the distinctive artwork of Star Wars series artist Drew Struzan gracing the movie poster and other advertising—seem modest and almost unnecessary. Few film studios released films during the same week as the release of The Phantom Menace; among the more courageous were DreamWorks and Universal Studios, with the releases of The Love Letter and Notting Hill respectively. The Love Letter was a box-office flop, whereas Notting Hill fared rather well and followed The Phantom Menace closely in second place.[9] Challenger, Grey & Christmas of Chicago, a work-issues consulting firm, estimated that 2.2 million full-time employees did not appear for work to attend the film, resulting in $293 million in lost productivity. The Wall Street Journal reported that such a large number of workers announced plans to view premiere screenings that many companies shut down on the premiere day.[10] Many fans began waiting outside cinema theaters as early as a month in advance of ticket sales.[11] </p>

<p> More theatre lines appeared when it was announced that cinemas were not allowed to sell tickets in advance until two weeks into the release. This was done out of fear that family theatre-goers would either be unable to receive tickets or would be forced to pay higher prices. Tickets were instead to be sold on a traditional first-come-first-serve basis.[12] However, after meetings with the National Association of Theatre Owners, Lucasfilm agreed to allow advance ticket sales on May 12, 1999, provided that there be a 12-ticket limit per customer.[13] As a result, however, some advance tickets were sold by "scalpers" as high as $100 apiece, which a distribution chief called "horrible," stating it was exactly what they wanted to avoid.[14] Daily Variety reported that theatre owners received strict instructions from Lucasfilm that the film could only play in the cinema's largest auditorium for the first 8–12 weeks; no honor passes were allowed for the first eight weeks, and they were obligated to send their payments to distributor 20th Century Fox within seven days.[15] Servers at the film's official website became gridlocked soon after the release of the first teaser trailer,[16] and many fans of the series paid full admission to see Meet Joe Black only to leave after the trailer had run. The same tradition followed months later when the theatrical trailer was featured in front of Wing Commander.[17] The theatrical trailer caused even more notable media hype, because it not only premiered in theaters, but screened at the ShoWest Convention in Las Vegas, and was aired on television on Entertainment Tonight and Access Hollywood.[18] An unusual marketing scheme was pursued across the United Kingdom, where the teaser trailer was released on December 2, 1998 and then pulled from theaters six weeks later.[19] </p>

<p> Despite worries about whether the film would be finished in time, two weeks prior to its debut Lucasfilm pushed the release date up from May 21 to May 19 of 1999. At the ShoWest Convention, Lucas stated that the change was to give the fans a "head start" by allowing them to view it over the week and allowing families the chance to view on the weekends. In a nod toward his future with digital technology, Lucas stated that the film would be released on four digital projectors on June 18, 1999.[20] Eleven charity premieres were staged across the United States on May 16, 1999; proceeds from the Los Angeles event were given to the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation with corporate packages available for $5,000–$25,000.[21] Other charity premieres included the Dallas premiere for Children's Medical Center, the Aubrey Fund for Pediatric Cancer Research at the Sloan-Kettering Hospital in New York, the Big Brother/Sister Assn. of the Philadelphia premiere, and the Children's National Medical Centre in Washington D.C. A statement said that tickets were sold at $500 apiece and that certain sections were set aside for disadvantaged children.[22] </p>

<p> The DVD features a commentary track by Lucas, producer Rick McCallum, editor Ben Burtt, animation director Rob Coleman, and visual effects supervisors John Knoll, Dennis Muren, and Scott Squires. It includes seven deleted scenes completed specifically for the DVD, and The Beginning: Making Episode I, an hour-long documentary film drawn from more than 600 hours of footage, including an insider's look at Lucasfilm and ILM during the production. The viewer can access a multi-angle storyboard-to-animatic-to-film segment featuring the submarine and podrace lap 1 sequences. The DVD includes two documentary sources, five featurettes exploring the storyline, design, costumes, visual effects, and fight sequences in the film, and an award-winning twelve-part web documentary series chronicling the production. The Duel of the Fates music video featuring John Williams and the London Symphony Orchestra was included on the DVD as well. The final special features included are a never-before-seen production photo gallery with a special caption feature, theatrical posters and print campaigns from around the world, a theatrical teaser and launch trailers, seven TV spots, Star Wars: Starfighter - The Making of a Game featurette from LucasArts, and a DVD-ROM weblink to exclusive Star Wars content. </p>

<p> Despite the Walt Disney Company's 2012 purchase of Lucasfilm Ltd. and the release rights to all future Star Wars films, Fox was to retain original distribution rights to Star Wars: Episode IV A New Hope, which they co-produced and co-financed, in perpetuity in all media worldwide. Fox was also to retain theatrical, nontheatrical, and home video rights worldwide for the franchise's five subsequent films, which Lucasfilm produced and financed independently, through May 2020, at which time ownership was to transfer to Disney. This complex relationship between Fox and Disney, particularly in regards to Fox's perpetual rights to Episode IV, was to create an obstacle for any future boxed set comprising all nine films.[28] On December 14, 2017, The Walt Disney Company announced that it was acquiring most of Fox's parent company, 21st Century Fox, including the film studio and all distribution rights to A New Hope.[29] On March 20, 2019, the deal was officially completed.[30] On April 12, 2019, a Blu-ray box set containing the nine main instalments of the Star Wars saga remastered in 4K was reportedly announced to be in development for a 2020 release.[31] </p>

<p> Meanwhile, Obi-Wan and Qui-Gon encounter Darth Maul once more and engage him in a lightsaber duel. Despite Maul's enormous skill, Obi-Wan and Qui-Gon gradually force him to give ground; however, Obi-wan is delayed when Maul knocks him off a platform, and when he catches up to them a temporary energy barrier prevents him from rejoining the duel. Facing Qui-Gon alone, Maul stabs him through the chest, mortally wounding him. Obi-Wan arrives, and in a fit of rage cuts away half of Maul's double-bladed lightsaber; however, Maul wears him down and disarms him, trapping him on the edge of an abyss. As Maul gloats, Obi-wan calms himself, leaping out of the pit and summoning Qui-Gon's lightsaber; he cuts Maul in half, knocking him into the abyss. Qui-Gon asks Obi-Wan to train Anakin and become his teacher, then dies. Palpatine is elected as the new Supreme Chancellor of the Republic, the Federation leader Viceroy is sent to stand trial for his crimes, Obi-Wan is bestowed the rank of Jedi Knight, and the Jedi Council accepts Anakin as Obi-Wan's young padawan (apprentice). However, the Jedi are still mystified by the recent reemergence of the Sith, and even at Qui-Gon's funeral they are left to wonder if Darth Maul was the Sith master or merely the apprentice, since there are always two of them. At a festive ceremony, Padmé presents a gift of appreciation and friendship to the Gungans, and smiles at Anakin, ending the film. </p>

<p> Natalie Portman as Queen Padmé Amidala: The young queen of Naboo at 14 years of age, Amidala hopes to protect her planet from a blockade brought on by the Trade Federation. Over 200 actresses were auditioned for the role,[3] with production notes stating that "The role required a young woman who could be believable as the ruler of that planet, but at the same time be vulnerable and open." Portman was chosen especially for her performances in The Professional (1994) and Beautiful Girls (1996), which impressed Lucas.[2] He stated, "I was looking for someone who was young, strong, along the lines of Leia [and] Natalie embodied all those traits and more."[2] The actress was unfamiliar with Star Wars prior to being cast,[2] but was enthused over being cast as Naboo's queen, a character she expected to become a role model: "It was wonderful playing a young queen with so much power. I think it will be good for young women to see a strong woman of action who is also smart and a leader."[4] </p>

<p> During the process of writing the original Star Wars, George Lucas reportedly realized that the story he had written was too vast in scope to be covered in one stand-alone film, and thus, the original film was meant to be the introduction to a much wider story arc that could be covered by sequels if the first film turned out to be successful. The original film eventually evolved, from being the first film in the sequence, to a film actually belonging to the saga's second trilogy.[24][25] By the time of the third draft, Lucas had negotiated a contract that gave him rights to make two sequels. He had also by that point developed a fairly elaborate back-story to aid his writing process.[26] While writing the first sequel, The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas considered different directions in which to take the story. He turned the villain Darth Vader into the father of hero Luke Skywalker, and developed a backstory depicting Vader as having once been Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker, a powerful warrior who was swayed to the dark side of the Force.[27] With this new backstory in place, Lucas decided that the series would be a trilogy, renaming the film from "Episode II" to "Episode V".[28] By the time of the trilogy's final film, Return of the Jedi, Vader became a tragic character and was ultimately redeemed. However, Lucas stated that he was "burned out" and would take a break from the series.[29] </p>

<p> After losing much of his fortune in a divorce settlement in 1987, George Lucas had no desire to return to Star Wars, and had unofficially canceled his sequel trilogy by the time of Return of the Jedi. But since Lucas had developed most of the backstory, the idea of prequels continued to fascinate him.[30] In the early 1990s, Star Wars saw a resurgence in popularity in the wake of Dark Horse's comic line and Timothy Zahn's trilogy of novels. Seeing that there was still a large audience for his idea of a prequel trilogy, and with the explosion of CGI technology, George Lucas considered returning to directing.[31] By 1993 it was announced, in Variety among other sources, that he would be making the prequels. He began outlining the story, now indicating that Anakin Skywalker would be the main protagonist rather than Obi-Wan Kenobi, and that the series would be a tragic one examining Darth Vader's origins. Lucas also began to change how the prequels would exist relative to the originals, from a "filling-in" of history, backstory, existing parallel or tangential to the originals, to the beginning of one long story that started with Anakin's childhood and ended with his death. This was the final step towards turning the franchise into a "saga".[32] </p>

<p> George Lucas began writing the new Star Wars trilogy on November 1, 1994.[33] The screenplay for Star Wars was adapted from Lucas' 15-page outline that was written in 1976. The early outline was originally designed to help Lucas track the character backstories and what events had taken place before the original trilogy.[33] At first Anakin's age was twelve, but Lucas reduced it to nine because he felt the lower age fit better the plot point of Anakin being affected by his mother being separated from him. Eventually, Anakin being younger lead Lucas to rewrite Anakin's participation in the final battle - small scenes with him figuring out how the ship works, R2D2 helping Anakin - to make it sound more believable.Template:Sfn While the film's working title was The Beginning,[33] Lucas later revealed the true title to be The Phantom Menace; a reference to Palpatine hiding his true identity as an evil Sith Lord behind the facade of a well-intentioned public servant.[34] </p>

<p> The story ended with five plots going on simultaneously, one leading to another - the central is Palpatine's intent to become Chancellor, which leads to the Trade Federation's attack to Naboo, the Jedis being sent there, Anakin being met along the way, and the rise of the Sith lords. Like with the original trilogy, Lucas constructed The Phantom Menace to illustrate a number of themes through the narrative. Duality is frequent, with Amidala being a queen who passes as a handmaiden, Palpatine playing on both sides of the war, and Obi-Wan at odds with his rebellious master but eventually becoming Qui-Gon by taking on his rebellious personality and his responsibilities. Balance also emerged frequently, with both Anakin being supposedly the chosen one to bring balance to the Force, and the characters having someone to influence them - as Lucas explained, "Anakin needed to have a mother, Obi-Wan needed a Master, Darth Sidious needed an apprentice" as without interaction and dialogue "you wouldn't have drama".Template:Sfn </p>

<p> Within three to four months of Lucas beginning the writing process, Chiang and his design team started a two-year process of reviewing thousands of designs for the film.[35] Chiang stated that Lucas intended Episode I to be a stylistically different production from the other Star Wars films, being "richer and more like a period piece, since it was the history leading up to A New Hope." The three planets in which the story takes place - some with varied environments, such as the human and Gungan cities of Naboo and three different buildings in Coruscant - would be given distinctive looks, with some basis in the real world except for the Gungan city, which instead had an art nouveau-inspired visual. The concept drawings of Ralph McQuarrie for the original trilogy served as the basis for Mos Espa - which also drew from old Tunisian hotels and buildings, and had touches such as a marketplace to differentiate from A New Hope's Mos Eisley - and Coruscant, in particular a metropolis design which became the basis for the Senate.Template:Sfn Bocquet would later flesh out the work of Chiang's team and design the interiors, translating the concepts into construction blueprints with environments and architectural styles that had some basis in reality "to give the audience something to key into.Template:Sfn </p>

<p> Stunt coordinator Nick Gillard was recruited to create a new Jedi fighting style for the prequel trilogy. Gillard likened the lightsaber battles to a chess game "with every move being a check." Because of their short-range weapons, Gillard theorized that the Jedi would have had to develop a fighting style that merged every sword fighting style, such as kendo and other kenjutsu styles, with other swinging techniques, such as tennis swings and tree-chopping. While training Liam Neeson and Ewan McGregor, Gillard would write a sequence to be an estimated 60 seconds long, meant to be among five to six sequences per fight.[36] Lucas later referred to Jedi as being "negotiators", rather than high-casualty soldiers. The preference of hand-to-hand combat was intended to give a more spiritual and intellectual role to the Jedi.[36] As Gillard thought the stunt jumps did not look realistic with the actors and stuntmen dangling from wires, air rams propelled them into the air instead.[37] </p>

<p> Lucas also decided to make elaborate costumes, considering that the society was more sophisticated than the one depicted in the original trilogy. Designer Trisha Biggar and her team created over one thousand costumes, with inspiration from various cultures around the globe.[38] Biggar worked closely with concept designer Iain McCaig, creating a color palette for the inhabitants of each world - while Tatooine followed A New Hope with sun-bleached sand colors, Coruscant had grays, browns and blacks, and Naboo had green and gold for humans, while Gungans wore "a leathery look, like their skin". The Jedi costumes followed the tradition from the original,Template:Sfn with Obi-Wan's being directly inspired by the one worn by Guinness. Lucas stated that he and Biggar would look at the conceptual art to work on "translating all of these designs into cloth and fabric and materials that would actually work and not look silly." Biggar also consulted Gillard to seek ways the costumes would accommodate action scenes, and the creature department for fabrics that "wouldn't wear too heavily" on the alien skins. A huge wardrobe department was set at Leavesden Film Studios to create from scratch over 250 costumes for the main actors and 5000 for the background ones.Template:Sfn </p>

<p> Up until the film's production, many special effects in the film industry were achieved by the use of miniature models, matte paintings, and on-set visual effects, although other films had made extensive use of computer-generated imagery (CGI). Knoll previewed 3,500 storyboards for the film, with Lucas accompanying him to explain what factors of the shots would be practical and what would be created through visual effects. Knoll later recounted that on hearing the explanations of the storyboards, he was unaware of any way to accomplish what he had seen. The result was to mix original techniques with the newest digital techniques to make it difficult for the viewer to guess which technique was being used. New computer software was written by Knoll and his visual effects team to create certain shots in the film, including cloth simulators for a realistic depiction of the digital characters' clothing. Another goal was to create computer-generated characters that could act seamlessly with live-action actors. While filming scenes with CGI characters, Lucas would block the characters using their corresponding voice actor on-set. The voice actors were then removed and the live-action actors would perform the same scene alone. A CGI character would later be added into the shot, completing the conversation.[44] Lucas also used CGI to correct the physical presence of actors in certain scenes.[14] Practical models were also used when their visuals helped, with miniature sceneries for backgrounds and set extensions, and model vehicles that would both be scanned to create the digital models or filmed to represent spaceships and podraces.Template:Sfn </p>

<p> As with previous Star Wars installments, the film's score was composed and conducted by John Williams. He started working on the score in October 1998, and began recording the music with the London Voices and London Symphony Orchestra at Abbey Road Studios on February 10, 1999. Williams decided to use more electronic instruments such as synthesizers to enhance the sound, and more choral pieces to "capture the magical, mystical force that a regular orchestra might not have been able to provide" and reflect the different atmosphere, "more mysterious and mystical and less military" than the original trilogy.[46] One of the most notable tracks is "Duel of the Fates", that even received its own music video, which uses the chorus introduced to give a religious, temple-like feel to the epic lightsaber duel.[47] While composing Anakin's theme, Williams tried to reflect both the innocence of his childhood, and foreshadow his transformation into Darth Vader by putting slight suggestions of "The Imperial March" into the melody.[46] </p>

<p> The Jedi practice Zen-like meditation and martial arts, as did the ancient Japanese Samurai warriors. The name "Qui-Gon" adapts the term Qigong, which refers to a Chinese discipline involving meditation and cultivating the flow of the vital energy called "Chi" or "Qi" for healing, health and combat. The words Ch'i (Chinese), ki (Japanese) and the Indian term "Prana" are all referring to the energy thought to flow through all living things, from the source of all chi (or power) which is "The Way" or "The Tao" in Chinese philosophy. In Taoist philosophy, from The Way is born the two opposing but complementary aspects of reality or nature, yin and yang. Unlike Chinese philosophy, where yin and yang are not moral qualities, the ancient Persian philosophy of Zurvanism taught that the dualism of dark and light forces are locked in eternal battle while at the same time being two sides (or evolutes) of the same "Force", the force of time itself (Zurvan): the prime mover. These elements derive primarily from Eastern and Iranian religions and myths.[50] </p>

<p> More theater lines appeared when it was announced that cinemas were not allowed to sell tickets in advance until two weeks into the release. This was done out of fear that family theater-goers would be either unable to receive tickets or forced to pay higher prices. Tickets were instead to be sold on a traditional first-come-first-served basis.[57] However, after meetings with the National Association of Theatre Owners, Lucasfilm agreed to allow advance ticket sales on May 12, 1999, provided that there be a twelve-ticket limit per customer.[58] As a result, however, some advance tickets were sold by scalpers as high as $100 apiece, which a distribution chief called "horrible", stating it was exactly what they wanted to avoid.[59] Daily Variety reported that theater owners received strict instructions from Lucasfilm that the film could only play in the cinema's largest auditorium for the first 8–12 weeks; no honor passes were allowed for the first eight weeks, and they were obligated to send their payments to distributor 20th Century Fox within seven days.[60] </p>

<p> Despite worries about whether the film would be finished in time, two weeks before its theatrical release Lucasfilm pushed the release date up from May 21, 1999, to May 19, 1999. At the ShoWest Convention, Lucas stated that the change was to give the fans a "head start" by allowing them to view it over the week and allowing families the chance to view it on the weekends. Foreshadowing his future conversion to digital cinematography, Lucas stated that the film would be released on four digital projectors on June 18, 1999.[61] Eleven charity premieres were staged across the United States on May 16, 1999; receipts from the Los Angeles event were donated to the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation with corporate packages available for $5,000–$25,000.[62] Other charity premieres included the Dallas premiere for Children's Medical Center, the Aubrey Fund for Pediatric Cancer Research at the Sloan-Kettering Hospital in New York, the Big Brother/Sister Association of the Philadelphia premiere, and the Children's National Medical Center in Washington, D.C. A statement said that tickets were sold at $500 apiece and that certain sections were set aside for disadvantaged children.[63] </p>

<p> The film was released worldwide on VHS between April 3 and 8, 2000. In North America it came out on April 4 in two different versions, a standard pan and scan and a Collector's Edition widescreen. In its first two days of availability, the regular version sold 4.5 million copies and the limited edition, 500,000.[83] Later, it became the first Star Wars film to be officially released on DVD, on October 16, 2001. The film's DVD version had certain scenes and other elements edited and inserted by George Lucas, making it slightly different from its theatrical release while retaining an identical plot. Among the special features are seven deleted scenes completed specifically for the DVD, a commentary track featuring among others Lucas and producer Rick McCallum, and a number of documentaries, including a full-length documentary entitled "The Beginning: Making Episode I". The Phantom Menace became the fastest selling DVD ever in the U.S., with 2.2 million copies sold in its first week after release.[84] The DVD version was re-released in a prequel trilogy box set on November 4, 2008.[85] A LaserDisc version of The Phantom Menace was also released in Japan, several months before it was available on DVD in the U.S.[86] The Star Wars films were released on Blu-ray Disc on September 16, 2011 in three different editions.[87] </p>

<p> At the time of its original release, The Phantom Menace received mixed to positive reviews from film critics. As of the film's 3D re-release during March 2012, the film holds a 57% "Rotten" rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, with an average rating of 5.8/10, based on 186 reviews.[94] It also has a score of 51/100 ("mixed or average reviews") on Metacritic based on 36 reviews.[95] On both sites, it is the lowest rated film in the Star Wars film series. Many aspects of the scripting were criticized, especially the character of Jar Jar Binks, who was regarded by many members of the older fan community as toyetic — purely a merchandising opportunity rather than a serious character in the film.[96][97] Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times described Binks as "a major miscue, a comic-relief character who's frankly not funny." [98] George Lucas criticized the American media for using fan opinions from the Internet as a reliable source for their news stories.[99] In 2002, with the release of Attack of the Clones, Ewan McGregor said that in retrospect The Phantom Menace slightly lacked some of the "humor and colour" of the forthcoming prequels. He felt as a result of bearing the weight of setting up the entire saga, it seemed "kind of flat."[100] One critic observed that, "Perhaps the absolute creative freedom director George Lucas enjoyed while dreaming up the flick's 'comic' relief – with no studio execs and not many an independently minded actor involved – is a path to the dark side." [101] </p>

<p> The introduction of midi-chlorians (microscopic organisms that mediate use of the Force) in the film has been controversial among fans. Those against it have seen it as a concept that negates the Force's spiritual quality, although the film itself still portrays the Force as a mysterious entity using the midi-chlorians as a link through which the Force communicates with living beings. Film historian Daniel Dinello notes, "Anathema to Star Wars fanatics who thought they reduced the Force to a kind of viral infection, midi-chlorians provide a biological interface, the link between physical bodies and spiritual energy."[113] Religion expert John D. Caputo adds, "In the 'Gospel according to Lucas' a world is conjured up in which the intractable oppositions that have tormented religious thinkers for centuries are reconciled. ... The gifts that the Jedi masters enjoy have a perfectly plausible scientific basis, even if its ways are mysterious: their bodily cells have a heavier than usual concentration of 'midi-chlorians.'"[114] </p>

<p> After the film's release, there was controversy over whether several alien characters reflected racial stereotypes, notably: the oafish, slow-witted Jar Jar Binks had long droopy ears reminiscent of dreadlocks and spoke with what many perceived as a Caribbean patois (particularly Jamaican Creole);[115] the greedy and corrupt Neimoidians of the Trade Federation spoke with East Asian accents; and the unprincipled desert trader Watto has been interpreted as a Fagin-esque Jewish stereotype. Lucas has categorically denied all of these implications;[96] however, animator Rob Coleman admitted that he viewed footage of Alec Guinness as Fagin in Oliver Twist to inspire his animators in creating Watto.[116] Jar Jar Binks was described by one critic as "Servile and cowardly...a black minstrel-ish stereotype on par with Stepin Fetchit."[101] Michael Eric Dyson, professor of African-American studies at Georgetown University, observed that the entire Gungan people seem oddly suggestive of a primitive African tribe: "The leader of Jar Jar's tribe is a fat, bumbling buffoon with a rumbling voice, and he seems to be a caricature of a stereotypical African tribal chieftain."[117] </p>

<p> Despite its mixed critical reception, The Phantom Menace was a major financial success, breaking many box office records in its debut. It broke The Lost World: Jurassic Park's records for the largest single-day gross with more than $28 million in the opening day (surpassed in 2001 by Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone), and fastest to $100 million gross in five days (surpassed in 2002 by Spider-Man).[118] It also became the fastest film to reach the $200 million and $300 million mark, surpassing Independence Day and Titanic respectively.[119] The Phantom Menace was 1999's most successful film, earning $431,088,295 domestically (in North America) and $493,229,263 in other territories for a worldwide total of $924,317,558.[119] At that time, the film ranked as the third highest-grossing film of all time domestically (behind Titanic and Star Wars), and the second highest-grossing film of all time worldwide (behind Titanic) when not adjusting for inflation of ticket prices. When adjusting for ticket price inflation, it ranked as the 19th highest-grossing film domestically (making it the fourth Star Wars film to be in the Inflation-Adjusted Top 20). International grosses which exceeded $10 million included Australia ($25.9 million), Brazil ($10.4 million), France and Algeria ($43 million), Germany ($53.9 million), Italy ($12.9 million), Japan ($109.9 million), Mexico ($12 million), Spain ($25 million), and the United Kingdom and Ireland ($81.9 million).[120] </p>

<p> After its 3D re-release in 2012, the total worldwide box office gross surpassed $1 billion. Although the film had lost some of its rankings in the various lists of highest-grossing films in the intervening years, the 3D re-release returned the film to the worldwide all-Time top ten for several months (it is currently in 12th place).[121] In North America, it overtook the original Star Wars as the saga's most financially successful film when not adjusting for inflation of ticket prices, and is currently the fifth highest-grossing film of all time domestically.[122] Also domestically, it increased its rank on the Adjusted for Ticket Price Inflation list to 16th place (one place behind Return of the Jedi).[123] The 3D re-release, which premiered in February 2012, earned $43 million worldwide on its opening weekend ($22.5 million of which was in North America). To date, the 3D re-release has made total of $Template:Val worldwide (including $43.5 million domestically), and has increased the film's overall box office takings to $474.5 million domestically, and $552.5 million in other territories.[124] The film crossed the $1 billion mark worldwide on February 22, 2012, making it the first Star Wars film to accomplish this feat and the eleventh film in history to do so, not taking inflation into account. Its current worldwide total stands at $1,027,044,677.[125] </p>

<p> The Phantom Menace was nominated for three Academy Awards: Best Sound Editing, Best Visual Effects, and Best Sound Mixing (Gary Rydstrom, Tom Johnson, Shawn Murphy and John Midgley), losing all three to The Matrix.[126][127] In contrast, the film received seven Golden Raspberry Award, or Razzie, nominations. These included Worst Picture, Worst Director, Worst Screenplay, Worst Supporting Actor (Jake Lloyd as Anakin), Worst Supporting Actress (Sofia Coppola as Saché), Worst Screen Couple (Jake Lloyd and Natalie Portman), and won the Worst Supporting Actor category with Jar Jar Binks actor Ahmed Best.[128] The film won Saturn Awards for Best Costumes and Best Special Effects,[129] the MTV Movie Award for Best Action Scene,[130] and a Young Artist Award for Jake Lloyd's performance.[131] It was also nominated for, among others, the BAFTAs in Visual Effects and Sound,[132] and the Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media.[133] Empire magazine ranked The Phantom Menace 449th in a 2008 list of the 500 greatest movies of all time.[134] </p>

<p> A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away, a group of rebels is fighting against the Galactic Empire. Princess Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher) has stolen the plans to the Empire’s latest superweapon, the Death Star. She gives the plans to a droid called R2-D2 (Kenny Baker), who escapes the Empire with counterpart C-3PO (Anthony Daniels). The two land on the desert planet Tatooine, where they soon meet local farm boy Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill). Luke accidentally uncovers a message hidden in R2 from Leia, who requests the aid of Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness). After the Empire kills Luke’s aunt and uncle, he agrees to join Kenobi in rescuing the princess. They team up with local smuggler Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and his friend Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew) to rescue her. With the villainous Darth Vader after them, will they be able to rescue the princess and save the galaxy? </p>

<p> Desmond Ryan Philadelphia Inquirer George Lucas' Star Wars is not a film that readily leads itself to comparisons, so it may as well begin with the superlatives. This captivating science fantasy is the finest pure entertainment to reach the screen in ages. Apr 23, 2025 Full Review Gene Siskel Chicago Tribune Not a great movie in the sense that it describes the human condition. It simply is a fun picture that will appeal to those who enjoy Buck Rogers-style adventures. What places it a sizable cut above the routine is its spectacular visual effects. Rated: 3.5/4 Apr 23, 2025 Full Review Pete Hamill New York Post This Hamill's name is Mark and we are not related. He plays a kid named Luke Skywalker, who is the classic dumb hero, and he plays that dumbness with terrific conviction. A true family gift. Apr 23, 2025 Full Review Wayne Harada Honolulu Advertiser A cinematic toy, a blissful concoction of wit and imagination, the brainchild of George Lucas of American Graffiti fame. It quickly is becoming everybody's movie of the year -- and add me to the list. But rightfully so: It is an out of this world delight. Apr 23, 2025 Full Review David Denby Boston Phoenix It's both a loving parody of banality and an awesomely beautiful work of imagination -- a throwaway, comic-book epic. Lucas's joke is first-rate. Apr 23, 2025 Full Review Russell Davies Observer (UK) I'd better leave the subject to the millions of children who will shortly be experts on it. This is a pre-sold success; but also, for my taste, a pre-digested one. Apr 23, 2025 Full Review Read all reviews </p>

<p> Peter R An all time classic that changed the world forever. Rated 5/5 Stars • Rated 5 out of 5 stars 04/24/25 Full Review james o the film had the idea in the veins of The Kirbyverse. Rated 5/5 Stars • Rated 5 out of 5 stars 04/21/25 Full Review Louise C The original, which our family went to see together. I loved Han Solo even tho' he's shallow. Harrison Ford did it well. In the end, I bought the DVD prequels and the first three, plus the two following that. Great stories, with something for everyone. Unlike many viewers I loved Jaja Binks! Rated 4/5 Stars • Rated 4 out of 5 stars 04/20/25 Full Review Audience Member 🍿 Una Buena Pelicula de un tiempo diferente una historia sencilla de entender que vale pena ver esta obra de los 70's recomendable. Rated 4.5/5 Stars • Rated 4.5 out of 5 stars 04/17/25 Full Review ALEX P Esse filme é um exemplo da mágica do cinema Rated 5/5 Stars • Rated 5 out of 5 stars 04/16/25 Full Review Eunika P From zero to hero, typically ‼️🙄🥱🥱🥱 🥱 🥱 🥱 The only plus is that Jabba is a wonderful human being 🤩🤩 Cheers from Poland 🇵🇱😘 Rated 2/5 Stars • Rated 2 out of 5 stars 04/13/25 Full Review Read all reviews </p>

<p> From hidden smuggling compartments, Solo ambushes an Imperial scanning crew and two stormtroopers respectively. With Han and Luke now disguised as the two stormtroopers, the group begins to figure out how to escape. Obi-Wan separates from the group to disable the tractor beam, leaving the others alone. While connected to the Imperial Network, R2-D2 discovers Princess Leia is aboard the station. Luke convinces Han and Chewbacca to rescue her with the vague promise of a grand reward. Han and Chewbacca reluctantly agree. Luke plans to march into Detention Block AA-23, claiming that Chewbacca is part of a prisoner transfer. C-3PO and R2-D2 are instructed to remain behind, and the trio sets off on their rescue attempt. Luke's plan works flawlessly in that they are quick to subdue the officers and guards in the Princess's cellblock. Unfortunately, no one thought to plan for their escape, and Leia takes charge, blasting a hole in a nearby grate and jumping through while Han and Luke hold off a squad of stormtroopers. Chewbacca, Luke and Han all dive after the princess into the unknown. </p>

<p> Inspired by films like the Flash Gordon serials and the samurai films of Akira Kurosawa, as well as such critical works as Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces and Frank Herbert's Dune books, Lucas began work on Star Wars in 1974. Ground-breaking in its use of special effects, this is considered to be among the most successful—and most influential—films of all time. Produced with a budget of US$11,000,000 and released on May 25, 1977, the film became one of the most successful of all time, earning $215 million in the United States and $337 million overseas during its original theatrical release, as well as winning several film awards, including 10 Academy Award nominations. It was re-released several times, sometimes with significant changes; the most notable versions were the 1997 Special Edition and the 2004 DVD, which were modified with CGI effects and recreated scenes. It was re-released in the Blu-ray format in September of 2011. The film was selected to be preserved by the Library of Congress as part of its National Film Registry. The film was selected in 1989, the program's first year in existence. </p>

<p> The ship is captured, and several Imperial stormtroopers come aboard. After defeating the small number of guards defending the ship, the Sith Lord Darth Vader arrives to assess the damage. Vader is outraged and questions Captain Antilles, whom he eventually strangles and kills. Hiding on the ship, Princess Leia is able to record a holographic message with the help of R2-D2, and gives the droid the plans for the Death Star and the responsibility of taking the message to Obi-Wan Kenobi, a Jedi-in-hiding on Tatooine. Leia is spotted by stormtroopers and they shoot her with a stun blast and bring her before Vader. Leia claims she and the ship's crew were on a diplomatic mission to Alderaan, but is disbelieved by Vader, who denounces her as a traitor and has her taken prisoner. Vader orders a message be sent to the Imperial Senate, informing them that the ship was destroyed, with everyone on board killed. R2-D2 and C-3PO use an escape pod in order to escape the ship and reach the planet of Tatooine below, narrowly escaping destruction by an Imperial cannon when the operators do not detect the droids in the pod. </p>

<p> Back in Mos Eisley, Luke, Obi-Wan and the Droids run into a patrol of stormtroopers, who ask for their identification. Obi-Wan uses a Jedi Mind trick on the lead trooper, who lets them pass. Arriving at Chalmun's Spaceport Cantina, the group hires smuggler Han Solo and his First Mate, a Wookiee named Chewbacca, for 17,000 credits, 2,000 in advance and 15,000 upon arrival, to take the four of them to Alderaan aboard their ship, the Millennium Falcon. Han has a brief run-in with Greedo over his debts to crime lord Jabba The Hutt, which ends with Han fatally shooting Greedo. Jabba later confronts Han in the Falcon's docking bay, scolding him for killing Greedo. Han defends the actions that offended Jabba (dumping a load of cargo when confronted by an Imperial patrol) and promises he'll pay the gangster what he owes. Luke, Ben and the droids arrive at the Falcon's hanger. A brief scuffle with stormtroopers and henchmen sent by Jabba ensues, and the Falcon escapes Imperial Star-Destroyers over Tatooine and sets a course to Alderaan, unaware that the Death Star has just arrived there as well. </p>

<p> Having docked with the Death Star, Solo and the others ambush two stormtroopers and the Imperial scanning crew sent to investigate the Falcon by hiding in hidden smuggling compartments. With Han and Luke now disguised as the two stormtroopers, the group storms a control room to figure out how to escape. Obi-Wan separates from the group to disable the tractor beam, leaving the others alone. While connected to the Imperial Network, R2-D2 discovers Princess Leia is aboard the station and is set for termination. Luke convinces Han and Chewbacca to rescue her with the vague promise of a grand reward. Han and Chewbacca reluctantly agree. Luke plans to march into Detention Block AA-23, claiming that Chewbacca is part of a prisoner transfer. C-3PO and R2-D2 are instructed to remain behind, and the trio sets off on their rescue attempt. Upon being met with suspicion, they are quick to subdue the officers and guards in the princess's cell block. Luke frees Leia from her cell, but the group are pinned down by a squad of stormtroopers. Leia takes charge, blasting a hole in a nearby grate and jumping through while Chewbacca, Luke, and Han all dive after the princess. </p>

<p> The Rebel strike force begins its attack on the Death Star, as the space station approaches Yavin 4. A group of X-wing, and Y-wing starfighters, Luke among them, assault a trench on the Death Star's surface to hit the station's vulnerable spot before it can destroy the Alliance's base. During this, most of the Rebel craft, including Luke's friend Biggs Darklighter, are picked off by a group of Imperial fighters led by Darth Vader. Tarkin is told by an imperial officer that the Rebels do pose a danger, but Tarkin refuses to evacuate in their supposed moment of triumph. With the Death Star only minutes from being in range to destroy Yavin 4, Luke makes one last run down the trench toward the exhaust port. Just as Vader opens fire on Luke from his personal TIE Advanced x1, Han returns in the Millennium Falcon and attacks the Imperials, resulting in Vader's TIE getting knocked out of the trench. Luke, aided by the voice of Kenobi and guided by the Force, accurately fires two proton torpedoes into the exhaust port and retreats. Moments later the battle station explodes, killing Tarkin and everyone on board, while Vader escapes into space. </p>

<p> During post-production on his previous film, American Graffiti, Lucas repeatedly discussed the concept of a "space opera" with producer Gary Kurtz. In January 1973 Lucas began work on this, and by May had prepared a 14-page story outline for distribution among film studios.[5] He had originally envisioned the film as being a continuation of both American Graffiti and Apocalypse Now (the latter of which he helped make before Warner Bros. Studios shut down his studio of American Zoetrope and thus forced him to hand over development to his compatriot, Francis Ford Coppola). His note for the basic plotline for the film, which was intended to be a response to the Vietnam War era, was that it involved "a technological empire going after a small band of freedom fighters."[6][7] According to Walter Murch, a former associate of Lucas when the latter was filming Apocalypse Now, the space opera setting was conceived in large part because, due to the Vietnam War still going on, the audiences would not have been receptive to a direct attack on American involvement in Vietnam.[8][9] Because of its outer space setting, the story was viewed as science fiction, an unpopular genre at the box office. Lucas later proposed that terms like "space fantasy" or "science fantasy" better fit the story.[5] He brought the outline to Universal Studios and United Artists; both rejected the project (the former refused directly, while the latter withheld their answer until after the 10 day wait period ended).[6][10][7] He also turned to Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, though they also turned him down.[6][7] Lucas disliked the studio system because his previous two films, American Graffiti and THX 1138, had been re-edited without his consent.[11] Still, aware that studios were unavoidable, he pursued Alan Ladd, Jr., the head of 20th Century Fox. Although Ladd did not grasp the technical side of the project, he believed that Lucas was talented. Lucas later stated that Ladd "invested in me, [but] he did not invest in the movie."[5] </p>

<p> In 1975, Lucas founded the visual effects company Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) after discovering that 20th Century Fox's visual effects department had been disbanded. ILM began its work on Star Wars in a warehouse in Van Nuys, California. Lucas himself bought old equipment for pennies on the dollar.[18] traditionally, models were filmed by moving them in front of a stationary camera.[19] Most of the visual effects used motion control photography, which creates the illusion of size by employing small models and slowly moving cameras called the Dykstraflex.[18] all the models would be shot in front of a blue screen, which would allow the placement of other elements into the scene, this process is called optical compositing.[18] the team the special effects team retooled an optical printer that allowed separate film strips to be photographed and combined onto a single layer of film.[18] artists created matt paintings to increase the scope and production value of a scene, by extending environments painted on glass, that would be photographed and combined with live-action elements.[18] Model spaceships were constructed on the basis of drawings by Joe Johnston, input from Lucas, and paintings by McQuarrie. Lucas opted to abandon the traditional sleekness of science fiction by creating a "used universe" in which all devices, ships, and buildings looked aged and dirty.[5][20][21] </p>

<p> During the chaos of production and post-production, the team made decisions about character voicing and sound effects. Sound designer Ben Burtt had created a library of sounds that Lucas referred to as an "organic soundtrack." For Chewbacca's growls, Burtt recorded and combined sounds made by dogs, bears, lions, tigers, and walruses to create phrases and sentences. Burtt created the robotic voice of R2-D2 by filtering his voice through an electronic synthesizer. Darth Vader's breathing was achieved by Burtt breathing through the mask of a scuba tank implanted with a microphone.[29] Lucas never intended to use the voice of David Prowse, who portrayed Darth Vader in costume, because of Prowse's thick English West Country accent. He originally wanted Orson Welles to speak for Darth Vader. However, he felt that Welles' voice would be too recognizable, so he cast the lesser-known James Earl Jones.[30] Nor did Lucas intend to use Anthony Daniels' voice for C-3PO. Thirty well-established voice actors, such as Stan Freberg, read for the voice of the droid. According to Daniels, one of the major voice actors recommended Daniels' voice for the role.[5][12] </p>

<p> Rough cuts of "Star Wars" used something called a "temp score", referring to musical material that was there to find a rhythm while editing but would not be kept in the final cut as it would be replaced by the final score. These temp tracks would help to inspire the direction John Williams was to take with his score as he began writing it.[35] Most of the temp tracks are not public knowledge, but some information has been revealed over the years. In one interview, editor Paul Hirsch confirmed that a cue from Bernard Herrmann's Psycho score containing the famous "3-note motif" was used to temp the scene where the heroes exit the smuggling chambers of the Millennium Falcon.[36] In another interview, Hirsch revealed that the opening to "The Sacrifice" from Igor Stravinsky's "The Rite of Spring" was used to temp the scene in the desert, the Jawa scenes were temped from other parts of the same piece, and the Main Title crawl was temped with the overture of Ivanhoe by Miklós Rózsa.[37] Later, in his own book, Hirsch would claim that the Main Title crawl was temped with Erich Korngold's theme to the 1938 Robin Hood. It is unknown which of these claims is correct. Also in his book, Hirsch mentions that the Cantina scene was tracked by Benny Goodman's "Avalon" from his Carnegie Hall performance, some of the early battle footage was tracked with "Dance of the Adolescents" from "The Rite of Spring", and the approach to the Death Star was temped with the music from the approach to Kong Island from Max Steiner's King Kong score.[38] In an interview, sound editor Ben Burtt said that Antonín Dvořák's New World Symphony was temped into the medal ceremony (Hirsch mentioned this in his book too), and parts of Anton Bruckner's Ninth Symphony were temped as Luke's theme.[37] Homages to many of these known temp tracks appear in the final score. For example, the cue [1m5-2m1] Desert Song from Star Wars is extremely similar to the opening of the Stravinsky piece it was temped with. Further, the music in [1m2] Main Title that plays when the underbelly of the Star Destroyer flies over the camera is very similar to the ending of "Mars - The Bringer of War" from Holsts' "The Planets". Even the 3-note motif from Psycho appears in the very opening of the Star Wars cue [7m1-7m2 New] The Hatch Opens, exactly where the temp track would have been. </p>

<p> On January 10th, 1977, Williams was invited to the spotting sessions, where he watched a rough cut of the film with Lucas, music supervisor Lionel Newman, music editor Ken Wannberg, producer Gary Kurtz, and film editor Paul Hirsch.[37][38][39] Over the next several weeks, he would get to work writing the score. The way Williams wrote his score, he began by creating all the various leitmotifs and character themes (such as "Luke's Theme," "Leia's theme," and "Ben's theme," the "Jawa theme," the "Rebel Fanfare," and the "Imperial motif"). He then went on to create the actual score by stringing all the themes he created together in a way that would match up with what was happening on screen.[40] It's unknown exactly how long John Williams spent writing the score, but it is certain that he would have had at the absolute most no more than 8 weeks, given that they started recording on March 5th. This is unrealistic because there needed to have been time for the orchestrators to write out all the various parts for the players, so it is more likely that the score was completed in 7 weeks or less. </p>

<p> As with any creative process, parts of the score went through multiple revisions. One well-known example is the cue "Lost R2", which scores the famous "binary sunset" scene. This scene was originally scored with a very different sounding piece that contained "Luke's theme". When Lucas heard the cue, he asked if it could be rescored with "Ben's theme" because he felt it fit the scene better.[35] It can be argued that this opened the door for "Ben's theme" to be recontextualized into what we think of today as the "Force theme". Another interesting example of the score changing was the cue "A Home Destroyed". When this cue was written, it was designed to score the end of Ben's house, Leia's torture, the discovery of the attacked sandcrawler, and Luke returning home to find his guardians dead and his home burned. While Williams was writing the score, the film was re-edited so that the board room scene would occur where the torture scene used to be. This caused the cue to be split in half. The first 14 bars were recorded by themselves with a newly written ending featuring the "Death Star theme" for the transition to the boardroom scene. Then a second cue was recorded, being made up of bars 31-71 (attacked sandcrawler and burned homestead scenes) and bars 17-30 (Leia torture scene), with some new transition material written to join them.[41] This isn't the only time editing of the film would require changes to the score, but it is one of the only examples where a re-edit resulted in the score being changed before it was recorded. The rest of the edits were done too late, and the remaining score changes were left to be made artificially by Ken Wannberg.[38] After the writing of the score was completed, the orchestrations were performed by lead orchestrator Herbert Spencer, who was assisted by Arthur Morton, Angela Morley, Al Woodbury, Alexander Courage and Williams himself.[40] </p>

<p> When it came time to record the score, Williams was given no choice but to record in London, presumably due to budget constraints and the fact that most of the film was shot in England.[37] He did have the choice of which orchestra he wanted to work with, and he ended up choosing the London Symphony Orchestra (LSO) due to its primary conductor being his friend André Previn. This was historically significant, as it was the first time Williams ever got to work with an organized symphony orchestra for a film.[35] Previous films of his usually recorded with freelance players. The score was recorded over the course of eight days between March 5th and March 16th of 1977 at Anvil Recording Studios in Denham, England.[34][35] People present at the sessions included John Williams himself, who was conducting, George Lucas, recording engineer Eric Tomlinson, his assistant Alan Snelling, and music editor Ken Wannberg. The orchestra itself was made up of 26 violins, 10 violas, 10 cellos, 6 basses, 11 woodwinds, 8 horns, 4 trumpets, 3 trombones, 2 tubas, 2 harps, 3 percussion, 1 timpani, 1 piano, and 1 celeste.[45] The score was recorded with approximately 23 microphones, placed at strategic positions around the orchestra. The mixing console, a Rupert Neve, had 24 inputs and 16 outputs. Recording engineer Eric Tomlinson used the console to create a live LCR (Left, Center, Right) mix while the orchestra was playing. The live mixes were recorded straight to two 35mm magnetic film recorders (with healthy Dolby A noise reduction applied). The live mix was also routed to tracks 1-3 of a Struder A80 16-track 2 inch recorder, with sections of the orchestra isolated on tracks 4-15 and a 50 hz pilot tone on track 16. The pilot tone could later be used for synchronization with the film during editing.[46][47] After the recording was completed, the best takes were combined into performance edits by music editor Ken Wannberg. He created performance edits using one of the 35mm mag recordings, as well as with the 16 track tapes. (note: a performance edit is where sections of different takes are combined together to create the best possible recording of a given cue) The 16 track tapes were intended both for backup purposes, and to be sent off to be remixed by John Neal for the eventual soundtrack release on LP. The 35mm edits would of course be further edited by Wannberg into the final stems for use in the film.[46][35][48] </p>

<p> The novelization of the film was published in December 1976, six months before the film was released. The credited author was George Lucas, but the book was revealed to have been ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster, who later wrote the first Expanded Universe novel, Splinter of the Mind's Eye. The book was first published as Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker; later editions were titled simply Star Wars and, later, Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, to reflect the retitling of the film. Certain scenes deleted from the film (and later restored or archived in DVD bonus features) were present in the novel, such as Luke at Tosche Station with Biggs and the encounter between Han and Jabba in Docking Bay 94. Other deleted scenes from the movie, such as a close-up of a stormtrooper riding on a Dewback, were included in a photo insert added to later printings of the book. Smaller details were also changed; for example, in the Death Star assault, Luke's callsign is Blue Five instead of Red Five as in the film. Lippincott secured the deal with Del Rey Books to publish the novelization in November 1976. By February 1977, a half million copies had been sold.[5] </p>

<p> Despite The Walt Disney Company's 2012 purchase of Lucasfilm and the release rights to all future Star Wars films, Fox was to retain original distribution rights to A New Hope, which they co-produced and co-financed, in perpetuity in all media worldwide. Fox was also to retain theatrical, nontheatrical, and home video rights worldwide for the franchise's five subsequent films, which Lucasfilm produced and financed independently, through May 2020, at which time ownership was to transfer to Disney. This complex relationship between Fox and Disney, particularly in regards to Fox's perpetual rights to Episode IV, was to create an obstacle for any future boxed set comprising all nine films.[62] On December 14, 2017, The Walt Disney Company announced that it was acquiring most of Fox's parent company, 21st Century Fox, including the film studio and all distribution rights to A New Hope.[63] On March 20, 2019, the deal was officially completed.[64] On April 12, 2019, a Blu-ray box set containing the nine main installments of the Star Wars saga remastered in 4K was reportedly announced to be in development for a 2020 release.[65] </p>

<p> Star Wars debuted on May 25, 1977 in 32 theaters, and proceeded to break house records, effectively becoming one of the first blockbuster films.[66] It remains one of the most financially successful films of all time. Some of the cast and crew noted lines of people stretching around theaters as they drove by. Even technical crew members, such as model makers, were asked for autographs, and cast members became instant household names.[5] The film's original total U.S. gross came to $307,263,857, and it earned $6,806,951 during its first weekend in wide release. Lucas claimed that he had spent most of the release day in a sound studio in Los Angeles. When he went out for lunch with his then-wife Marcia, they encountered a long queue of people along the sidewalks leading to Mann's Chinese Theater, waiting to see Star Wars.[23] The film became the highest-grossing film of 1977 and the highest-grossing film of all time until E.T. The Extra-Terrestrial broke that record in 1982. (With subsequent re-releases, Star Wars reclaimed the title, but lost it again to James Cameron's 1997 blockbuster Titanic.) The film earned $797,900,000 worldwide, making it the first film to reach the $300 million mark.[67] Adjusted for inflation it is the second highest grossing movie of all time in the United States, behind Gone with the Wind.[68] </p>

<p> In 1989, the U.S. National Film Registry of the Library of Congress selected the film as a "culturally, historically, or aesthetically important" film.[69] In 2006, Lucas' original screenplay was selected by the Writers Guild of America as the 68th greatest of all time.[70] The American Film Institute (or AFI) listed it 15th on a list of the top 100 films of the 20th century.[71] The American Film Institute has named Star Wars and specific elements of it to several of its "top 100 lists" of American cinema, compiled as a part of the Institute's 100th anniversary celebration. These include the 27th most thrilling American film of all time;[72] the thirty-ninth most inspirational American film of all-time;[73] Han Solo as the fourteenth greatest American film hero of all time and Obi-Wan Kenobi thirty-seventh on the same list.[74] The often repeated line "May the Force be with you" was ranked as the eighth greatest quote in American film history.[75] John Williams' score was ranked as the greatest American film score of all time.[76] </p>

<p> Luke Skywalker is in the Tatooine desert repairing a moisture vaporator, assisted by a Treadwell droid, when he notices shining objects in the sky. With his macrobinoculars Luke sees two ships engaged in combat beyond the atmosphere. He jumps into his landspeeder. The malfunctioning Treadwell blows a fuse and is unable to follow. Luke speeds off into the desert to find his friends. The scene originally occurred after the Tantive IV is boarded, just before Darth Vader's first appearance in the film. It is thought that there is no longer any clear footage of this scene available. Existing footage has been degraded by poor film storage conditions over the years. Before the film was cut, this was the audience's first sight of the young Luke Skywalker, much earlier than in the final cut. It was removed along with subsequent scenes of Luke and his friends in Anchorhead. George Lucas had originally written the scenes and shot them at the suggestion of his industry friends who thought that audiences wouldn't understand the story strictly being told from a droid's point of view. Upon realizing that the story was really about the droids' adventures and it was them leading things to Luke and Obi-Wan, etc. Lucas took the footage out. </p>

<p> Luke's landspeeder races into the town of Anchorhead, nearly running over an old woman. Luke rushes into Tosche Station excitedly telling his friends about the battle above their planet. He is overjoyed to be reunited with his friend Biggs Darklighter who is on planet leave from the Academy. Deak, Windy, Camie, Fixer and Biggs all follow Luke outside to see the battle with Luke's macrobinoculars. The battle appears to have ended and Luke's friends ridicule him for making it all up. This scene was to come just after R2-D2 and C-3PO eject from the Tantive IV in an escape pod, and before the scene where Princess Leia is led captive before Darth Vader. This scene establishes Luke's difficult relationships with his peers, and gives a picture of life on Tatooine. Storyline pacing may have been the deciding factor, but it should also be borne in mind that after Lucas's first screening of the rough cut of Star Wars in 1977, a fellow filmmaker jokingly accused him of producing "American Graffiti in space." This jibe probably influenced Lucas to cut the scenes set in Anchorhead. The sequence where Luke nearly runs down an old woman was an effects shot that was never completed. </p>

<p> Inspired by films like the Flash Gordon serials and the samurai films of Akira Kurosawa, as well as such critical works as Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces and Frank Herbert's Dune books, Lucas began work on Star Wars in 1974. Ground-breaking in its use of special effects, this is considered to be among the most successful—and most influential—films of all time. Produced with a budget of US$11,000,000 and released on May 25, 1977, the film became one of the most successful of all time, earning $215 million in the United States and $337 million overseas during its original theatrical release, as well as winning several film awards, including 10 Academy Award nominations. It was re-released several times, sometimes with significant changes; the most notable versions were the 1997 Special Edition and the 2004 DVD, which were modified with CGI effects and recreated scenes. It was re-released in the Blu-ray format in September of 2011. The film was selected to be preserved by the Library of Congress as part of its National Film Registry. The film was selected in 1989, the program's first year in existence. </p>

<p> Carrie Fisher died on December 27, 2016. Given that her character had featured prominently in Trevorrow's script,[34][35] the filmmaker met with Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy in January 2017 to discuss possible story solutions.[36] Kennedy said that the team had "pretty much started over,"[37] Jack Thorne was briefly hired to rewrite the initial script,[38] but according to Thorne, "the process was tough and didn't end well."[39] In September 2017, it was announced that Trevorrow had left the project due to creative differences,[40] and that he would be replaced by Abrams.[1] According to Kennedy, it was during the initial scripting phase that she realized Trevorrow wasn't the right person for the job;[41] she attributed this to Trevorrow having not been present at the story conferences for The Force Awakens, during which a basic plan for the trilogy had been laid out.[42] (Trevorrow went on to direct and co-write Jurassic World: Dominion, for which he viewed his Episode IX experience as a "practice run." Crewmembers from his Episode IX team joined him on the project.[43]) </p>

<p> Due to the time constraints and pressure of returning to the series, Abrams asked Chris Terrio to co-write the film.[12] In May 2018, he told The Wall Street Journal: "I had a bunch of ideas from the beginning, back on VII, of where the story would go. I just never in my wildest dreams thought I would have a chance to execute them."[48] The creative team met with Lucas,[49] Johnson, and Kasdan before writing the script;[50] according to Abrams, Lucas explained many of his own ideas about the Force and the midi-chlorians.[51] Terrio also spent some time doing extensive research into the Expanded Universe and recent Star Wars animation;[52] he was influenced by many of those stories in writing the film, comparing the process to writing nonfiction: "When we would make a story decision, we were fully aware that this now will become canon, and so are we sure that this is the right story decision? Are we sure about it character-wise? Are we sure about it thematically? Does it seem like it gels with George's original intentions from Episode IV? Does it gel with what we learned in the prequels and what we learned in the sequel trilogy?"[53] He thought of the core characters as analogous to children of revolutionaries who fought in the War of 1812.[54] </p>

<p> Abrams and Terrio were determined to make a film that would conclude the Skywalker saga and tie together the previous eight chapters.[49][55] The pair began the process by writing ideas on a series of dry erase boards at Bad Robot, and then transferring them to a Microsoft Word document.[56] They would also meet in coffee shops to discuss the script, at which they would use code names to refer to the characters.[57] During the process, they collaborated on ideas with Kennedy, Michelle Rejwan, Rick Carter, Roger Guyett, Kevin Jenkins, Michael Kaplan, and Neal Scanlan.[53] Kennedy and Rejwan gave them certain narrative beats that had to be hit.[58] Kennedy described the process to Gizmodo: "Nobody was being overly polite. If you didn't think something made sense. If you couldn't follow it, if you thought, from a fan's point of view, that you're stepping outside the lines and it was a bogus kind of thinking, no one was afraid to say that because we knew how important this was to get right. And we didn't let things go."[42] Abrams also described it as "this crazy challenge that could have been a wildly uncomfortable contortion of ideas and shoving in of answers and Band-Aids and bridges … I feel like we've gotten to a place–without jinxing anything–where we might have something incredibly special."[12] Terrio is quoted in The Art of Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker as saying "I've never rewritten a film as much as this one. It's like a tide. There's a new script every morning. But we just keep going at it and going at it, loosely thinking that it's not good enough. It's never good enough."[59] </p>

<p> The writers revisited some of the ideas Abrams and Kasdan had for The Force Awakens,[60] and also used some ideas that were present in Trevorrow's script.[31] Some major elements of the plot originated in a 2014 Lucasfilm story meeting: Leia being involved in bringing her son back to the light, the notion of Leia being a mentor to Rey, and Rey being a metaphorical Skywalker.[61] Certain aspects of the story changed significantly during pre-production,[62] and the film had frequent dialogue changes from day to day.[63][41] According to Pablo Hidalgo, Lucas and Michael Arndt's original plan was that Episode IX's villain would come out of hiding on Coruscant.[64] Producer Kathleen Kennedy claimed that Palpatine's return (an idea first used in Star Wars: Dark Empire) was planned from the beginning,[65] although Trevorrow believed it was a new idea by Abrams.[31] According to Terrio, he and Abrams didn't use anything from Trevorrow's script, although "There may have been certain elements that we used that had been in the original script and we weren't aware of it. The Guild makes the determination about those things."[66] Regardless, Trevorrow and his frequent writing partner Derek Connolly received story credits in the final film.[4] In regards to The Last Jedi's influence on the film, Abrams told Esquire: "As a filmmaker, working on episode IX, amazingly, nothing that he [Rian Johnson] did in Last Jedi got in the way of things that we had talked about wanting to do down the line, ideas that I had about where things might go, so… it wasn't like his story somehow derailed the things I wanted to pursue. In fact, strangely, they might have even helped strengthen them because we got to make some choices that sort of take advantage of the fact that Rian hadn't done the things that we were thinking about doing."[67] </p>

<p> Lucasfilm dispelled rumors that it would digitally recreate Fisher in future films.[68] Fisher's brother Todd said that he and Billie Lourd had granted Lucasfilm rights to use footage of her.[69] Kennedy initially claimed that Ms. Fisher would not appear in the film,[70] though Abrams later confirmed that Ms. Fisher would appear in the film via unused footage from The Force Awakens.[5] Mr. Fisher credited this decision to Abrams,[71] who said, "It was like finding this impossible answer to this impossible question."[72] According to Mr. Fisher: "There's a lot of minutes of footage. I don't mean just outtakes. This is unused, new content that could be woven into the storyline. That's what's going to give everybody such a great kick. It's going to look like it was meant to be. Like it was shot yesterday."[73] He also claimed that unused footage from The Last Jedi would also be used,[74] but Abrams later clarified that no footage from that film was used due to nothing substantial being available.[75] Ultimately, ILM placed Fisher's facial performance onto a digital body, with an on-set stand-in serving as a visual reference for the actors. This allowed the character to be placed in new locations, and for the effects artists to give her different clothes and a new hairstyle that would be unique to The Rise of Skywalker.[76] </p>

<p> Principal photography began at Pinewood Studios on August 1, 2018,[5][78] under the working title of "trlXie" (originally "Black Diamond").[79][80] Production also took place in Wadi Rum, Jordan (the same filming location for Jedha in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story) for three weeks.[81] Some sequences were filmed with 65mm film and IMAX cameras.[82][83] Because the film was under a shortened production timeline, the crew had to shoot everything they needed during principal photography,[84] and Maryann Brandon began editing on set.[85] Matt Smith was initially set to play a role in the film,[86] but by early 2019 the actor was no longer involved;[87] When he later spoke to the Happy Sad Confused podcast, Smith described his character as "a really groovy part and concept. It was a big thing, it was a big story detail, a transformative 'Star Wars' story detail and it never got quite over the line."[88] </p>

<p> Abrams felt less creatively constrained in making The Rise of Skywalker than he did with The Force Awakens,[89] citing Rian Johnson's work on The Last Jedi as the inspiration:[90] "Rian helped remind me that that's why we're on these movies—not to just do something that you've seen before."[91] According to Poe Dameron actor Oscar Isaac, the shooting of The Rise of Skywalker allowed for more improvisation than The Force Awakens or The Last Jedi: "It's a testament to J.J. coming back and feeling confident. There's less pressure for it to be right. We just want to make a good movie and have a really good time while doing it."[92] Abrams shot many of the character interactions in long takes, with actors sometimes coming up with their own lines.[93] Daisy Ridley also commented: "There was this thing: JJ would ask us to do the scene without speaking, just to feel the emotional… whatever. He was like, 'You never know what could come up.' We did that a couple of times. Then it became a joke, because we would just wet ourselves laughing."[94] </p>

<p> Prior to shooting, members of the cast were trained in various specialties to prepare for the shoot, such as kickboxing,[95] horseback riding, using a bow-and-arrow and holding a gun.[96][97] Ridley performed the majority of her character's stunts herself.[98] Filmmaker Kevin Smith visited the set (just as he did for The Force Awakens) and described what he saw: "Biggest set I've ever seen in my life. The dude's not directing a movie, it's like he's directing a small country."[99] The script was under even greater security than those of previous films, with actors not allowed to take copies home;[100][101][102] despite this, a copy was put up for sale on eBay, after Finn actor John Boyega accidentally left it under his bed and it was found by a cleaning person. However, Lucasfilm was warned about it and recovered the script before someone could buy it.[103][104] By December 11, 2018, Hamill had worked for "about a week" on the film, but had yet to shoot most of his scenes, which he expected to do alongside his work on the TV series Knightfall.[101] </p>

<p> The film was originally scheduled for release on May 24, 2019,[116] but was later pushed back to December 20,[8] giving the May 24 date to the live-action remake of Aladdin.[117] Footage was first publicly screened at Disney's March 8 investor's conference,[118] and briefly at CinemaCon 2019 as part of a montage of upcoming Disney films.[119] The film was featured in a panel at Celebration Chicago, featuring director/co-writer J.J. Abrams and producer Kathleen Kennedy.[120] The teaser trailer debuted at this event,[121] which also revealed the film's title and teaser poster.[122] During the convention, Abrams, Kennedy, and members of the cast were interviewed for Good Morning America.[50][123] The film was featured in the May issue of Vanity Fair,[89] the November issues of Empire,[124] Entertainment Weekly and Rolling Stone,[95][125][114] the December issue of People,[126] and the January 2020 issue of Empire.[127] A panel was held at the 2019 D23 Expo, featuring cast and crew, with the reveal of a new teaser poster and two show casings of footage;[128][129] The latter of the two was later released online and aired on television.[130] </p>

<p> ↑ The Boys and Star Trek star reveals secret Rise of Skywalker cameo by Susannah Alexander and Adam Tanswell on www.digitalspy.com (July 18, 2020): "Confirming that the Karl Urban listed in the 'additional voices' section of the end credits of the 2019 film is indeed him, the actor explained how his cameo came about. "Here's the process," he said. "I had the good fortune to go and visit JJ Abrams [the film's director] while he was shooting The Rise of Skywalker. While I was there, he put me in a stormtrooper uniform and we had a really fun day on set. "It's been one of my life-long goals to be a stormtrooper, so I can tick that off now." He also pinpointed the moment in which he is seen (or rather, his stormtrooper costume is) and heard, which is during a scene set on Kylo Ren's (Adam Driver) spaceship. "What is in the cut is my voice saying 'Knights of Ren' as Kylo Ren walks down a hallway past two stormtroopers. I am one of those stormtroopers," he said." (backup link) </p>

<p> This is a genuinely excellent movie, and the hate is grossly misplaced, ill-motivated, and undeserved. It's easily the best Star Wars movie since the original and The Empire Strikes Back, and if we're being objectively honest, it's probably better than both of them. The story has wonderful, deep-cutting themes on the fallacy of bloodlines, the social role of legends, the meaning of heroism and rebellion, and the powerful instruction of failure: all very elegantly tied together in a very coherent, tautly paced package. Rian Johnson, writer and director, seems to understand Star Wars better than anyone save George Lucas itself. At the very least, when I watched this movie the first time with a gigantic grin on my face, it felt like someone had experienced Star Wars the way I had since I first fell in love with the franchise shortly before my ninth birthday. As thoughtfully detailed as it is -- a Jedi facing off against the First Order using no violence, or Force projections leaving no footprints, for example -- it's also incredibly entertaining. The opening sequence alone is one of the most thrilling moments I've ever seen in Star Wars. And not nearly enough has been said about how incredibly gorgeous this film is. It's easily the prettiest Star Wars movie ever made, with both wonderful cinematography and excellent art direction. There's well-done, prominent use of a red and white color scheme. The "blood stains" of the final battle, where technically the salt of the planet is oxidizing into crimson whenever touched, such as when a soldier is taken out and ragdolls along the ground, is a great example of how the visuals and the themes of the movie dovetail together in an extremely effective way. Just such a clever, thoughtful movie. There's a sequence that -- absurdly! -- has drawn much scorn and criticism, called the Holdo maneuver, that frankly ought to be one of the Top 100 visual moments of the 21st century movie scene. It's so incredible to behold that both times I saw the movie in theaters, when the sound cuts out in the moment, you could literally hear gasps of astonishment at what was unfolding on screen. Pure, haunting beauty. What the show Andor was for writing, The Last Jedi was in a visually mesmerizing, theme-heavy, silver screen extravaganza. The big, bombastic moments are well complemented by the little touches: "I need someone to show me my place in all this," the sisters with their medallion halves, the amoral smuggler advocating the path of neutrality, a certain cameo from an old friend from the original movies, "We are what they grow beyond -- that is the true burden of all masters." Even the much maligned Canto Bight sequence has great discourse on the purpose and meaning of rebellion, and easily one of the coolest cinematographic movements in franchise history. (As someone said on Twitter, a Star Wars movie that finally does something interesting with the camera!) The sequence is an obvious homage to a classic 1920s film that first demonstrated the possibilities of film photography. That kind of homage is precisely something that George Lucas would do, famous for his tributes to Akira Kurosawa in particular. It's but a single example of how well this movie really understands Star Wars in a way that most of its haters are incapable of acknowledging or fully comprehending, but also in a way that's utterly delightful. It made me feel like I was a nine year old kid again, being whisked away on an amazing adventure to a galaxy far, far away. </p>

<p> What ticked fans of the original trilogy off wasn't all of this Monday morning quarterback, op-ed nonsense, but the clear and present toxic feminist shafting intended to belittle their Fandom by shoving horribly written, inconsistent, anti- continuity, pseudo-woke BS down their throats. Luke was NOT an empty character, but one who's character development didn't suit Kennedy's misandrist agenda, Lucas's inability to write relatable romance content, and the ridiculous notion that everything needed to be watered down to a kid friendly level to peddle merch. Star Wars was supposed to be a high adventure, futuristic swashbuckling/space cowboy feature, complete with adult themes. It's these highly relatable themes that resonated with multiple generations and drove interest in the merch. Both the prequel AND sequel trilogies were shameful attempts at trying to please everybody while setting up the conditions to please nobody, femi-nazis who wanted to invade and destroy it, or rather heavily appeal to a short attention span having generational segment that would eventually lose interest in such an inferior product. Ultimately, audiences were confused as to who The Last Jedi was being marketed to. Nobody was comfortable with Rey's force S.A. and violation. It made no sense for Luke to become the embittered mean old man when his equally failed predecessors (Yoda and Obi-Wan) didn't turn out that way. The force teleportation via diade relation was dumb, in addition to being disgusting to watch. It was obvious to see that Finn was supposed to be the love interest from the previous movie before the shift to appeal to racists who weren't fans in the first place. The cherry on top was Rey's destruction of everything Jedi while instantaneously "learning everything necessary to be a Jedi master" on the strength of toxic feminist "I think I can" ideology. The movie was a tragic, ill-begotten travesty meant to piss in the faces of fans who made the franchise a cash cow. </p>

<p> Johnson partially derived his story from one of George Lucas's ideas for Episode VII, in which Luke lives in seclusion in a Jedi temple and reluctantly trains a young girl named Kira.[13][14] According to Johnson, "I saw it as the job of this middle chapter to challenge all of those characters—let's see what happens if we knock the stool out from under them. [….] I started by writing the names of each of the characters, and thinking, 'What's the hardest thing they could be faced with?'" While writing, Johnson regularly met with the Lucasfilm Story Group and members of the cast to share ideas and drafts of the script;[15][16] "For me, I outline outline outline, and I notebook notebook notebook, then the last 10 percent of the process is actually typing the script. I plan it all out first. So while I was doing that, I was going in twice a week and sitting down and just vomiting these ideas out and talking them through with Kiri Hart and her whole group."[17] Johnson also screened select classic films such as The Bridge on the River Kwai, Gunga Din, Letter Never Sent, Sahara, Three Outlaw Samurai, To Catch a Thief, and Twelve O'Clock High.[18][19][20] </p>

<p> There was some confusion over Abrams' relationship with Johnson's script. Daisy Ridley said that Abrams had written an outline for the film, and that it had been rewritten by Johnson.[21] However, Abrams denied this, saying "We don't write a treatment but there are countless times we came up with something and said 'oh, this would be so great for Episode VIII!' or 'Thats what we could get to in IX!' […] We also knew that certain things were inevitable in our minds but that didn't mean it would be inevitable for whoever came in next."[6] "Larry Kasdan and I, who wrote the script together, definitely were setting things up and were conscious of the fact… which is a really weird opportunity in features to know that this was going to be the beginning of a three-picture story. So we were working on versions of what we knew we would have done or wanted to do and had meetings with Rian and Ram [Bergman], who is a producer, very early on and went over what we were thinking. But also knew that Rian had his own ideas coming in. He was going to take this thing in the place that he felt right."[22] "So the story he told took what we were doing and went in the direction that he felt was best but that is very much in line with what we were thinking as well."[23] Greg Grunberg also claimed that Abrams was so impressed by the script that he regretted not directing it himself.[24] Abrams later clarified: "I think that my enthusiasm for VIII is enormous. I think [Grunberg] also might have invented a couple of the quotes that he gave, but I am very much excited for and very jealous of anyone, especially Rian, who gets to work so closely with this extraordinary cast and crew."[25] </p>

<p> Production officially began in England in February 2016,[2][32] under the working title of Space Bear.[33] It utilized 14 stages at Pinewood Studios and a total of 125 sets,[34] with many of the crew from Episode VII returning.[35] Several cast members had to undergo extensive physical training prior to shooting.[36] As with the original trilogy, the character of Yoda was an entirely practical effect, with a new puppet created based on original molds for The Empire Strikes Back, and Frank Oz returning to operate and voice the character.[37] From March 9 to 16, production took place in Dubrovnik, Croatia,[38][39] followed by a return to Ireland for twelve weeks in County Cork.[40] Several members of the production likened the experience of making the film to working on an independent production.[41][42][43] Johnson took a lot of the behind-the-scenes photographs himself.[44] He also filmed a brief bit of content for Episode IX; This was requested by former Episode IX director Colin Trevorrow,[45] who also asked Johnson to include the shot of Poe and Rey introducing themselves.[46] Carrie Fisher worked with Johnson on some of the dialogue, in sessions that he described as "stream-of-consciousness ad-lib."[44] Per a suggestion from Fisher, several of the film's characters wear jewelry of some type.[47] Hamill was surprised by the changes in his character, and had to formulate a personal backstory for the character so as to play the character effectively.[48][49] In an interview with Polygon, Hamill described the security measures on set: "You get your pages in the morning, and they take them from you as you walk so they can shred them before it somehow leaks. You have security lines you have to walk through, both to and from set. And, not to mention, you have to wear these big monk hoods to protect your costume from drones."[50] By June 2016, filming was "in the home stretch."[51] Principal photography wrapped on July 22, 2016.[52] </p>

<p> Disney chairman Bob Iger originally announced the release date for Episode VIII of May 26, 2017, forty years and one day after the release of Star Wars: Episode IV A New Hope,[60] though the release date was later pushed back to December 15, 2017.[2] Rian Johnson first publicly discussed the film in a panel at Celebration Europe.[61] The film's title, The Last Jedi, was announced on January 23, 2017. The title announcement was accompanied with a release of a logo for the film featuring the Star Wars logo in red rather than its traditional yellow. This color change, previously seen with Return of the Jedi and with "Brothers" and "Revenge," installments of Star Wars: The Clone Wars focused on Darth Maul, led some to speculate that the film's creators may have been hinting at dark events within the film.[62] The title's announcement also launched a frenzy of online speculation in regard to the identity of the "last Jedi," with some noting that the term "Jedi" can be used plurally.[63] (Foreign translations also had the title as plural.[64][65][66]) However, Rian Johnson later said that it refers specifically to Luke Skywalker.[67] </p>

<p> Footage of The Last Jedi was shared with Disney shareholders in March 2017, including a look at the beginning of the film, which happens immediately following the ending of The Force Awakens.[68] Disney CEO Bob Iger, having seen the film, referred to it as a "perfect chapter" in the saga, stating, "I can promise you it's worth the wait."[69] On April 11, Hamill and Ridley appeared on Good Morning America to promote the Force for Change charity;[70] one of the three rewards was a trip for two to the premiere of The Last Jedi.[71] Cast and crew featured in a Last Jedi panel at Celebration Orlando.[72] At the end of the panel, Johnson debuted a teaser poster and teaser trailer.[73] The film was featured in the May 2017 issue of Vanity Fair (for which the cast and crew were photographed on-set by Annie Leibovitz) and both the August and December 2017 issues of Entertainment Weekly.[74][75][76] Johnson and the cast again appeared at July's D23, during which a behind-the-scenes featurette was released.[77] In the lead-up to release, cast and crew made various media appearances to promote the film, including Ellen,[78] Good Morning America,[79][80] Live with Kelly and Ryan, The Tonight Show, Jimmy Kimmel Live!,[81] Conan,[82] and The Late Show With Stephen Colbert.[83] Cast members were also spotlighted in contemporary issues of Elle,[84][85] TIME,[86] Esquire,[87][88] Rolling Stone[89] and The New York Times,[90] and Johnson and the cast participated in Facebook/Twitter Q&As.[91][92] </p>

<p> Carpenters — Clive Ainsworth, John Allen, Dave Ball, Alan Beastie, Syd Bell, Andrew Betts, Mike Birt, Jack Bohanna, Danny Bryant, Dean Bryant, Ceiran Canning, Ricky Carter, Paul Clark, Steve Clotherty, Tommy Costello, Dermot Cronin, James Cullane, Lee Dean, Jack Dehaan, Andrew Dixon, Dave Dobson, Liiam Docherty, Ceiran Donnely, Chris Drury, Peter Duffey, Mick Eley, Dave Engleman, Elliot Eveson, Nick Gerrard, Nick Goodall, Tom Gorden, Mike Green, Malachy Greghan, Craig Grey, Tom Henderson, Andrew Hill, Tony Hoskins, Paul Houston, Aaron Jenner, Rob Johnston, Nick Laurence, Steve Law, Paul Lynford, Tony Marks, Bernie Mayor, ​Kevin McCauley, Barry McMullen, Graham Mitchell, Sean O'Neil, Reg Patterson, Peter Presscott, Jason Rogers, Conner Rogerson, Paul Ross, Martin Scarth, Phil Seagrave, Alan Sheehan, Allistair Simpson, Ben Snook, Peter Squires, Ian Taylor, Scott Taylor, Dave Turner, Manny Villar, Paul Webb, Chris Westwood, Jacob Willis, Dennis Wilson, Dan Yellowhammer </p>

<p> “Star Wars: Episode VII – The Force Awakens” is the film that J.J. Abrams was put on Earth to make, as evidenced by the “Star Wars” echoes in his hit series “Lost,” and the way he kept trying to turn “Star Trek” into “Star Wars.” These tendencies could seem cutesy or irritating elsewhere, but they make sense in an according-to-Hoyle “Star Wars” movie. This new one, set 30 years after the events of “Return of the Jedi,” is funny, touching, and surprisingly light-footed. It boasts a lot of familiar elements, including Skywalker family mythology and another Death Star-type weapon, as well as self-aware lines about how things work in this series. The film ultimately runs up against the limitations of its own nature: like the James Bond films, the “Star Wars” movies are pretty much obligated to revisit certain elements, to the point where they might feel played out even if they hadn’t been raided by other films, TV shows and books (including Harry Potter). But it’s still an exhilarating ride, filled with archetypal characters with plausible psychologies, melodramatic confrontations fueled by soaring emotions, and performances that can be described as good, period, rather than “good, for ‘Star Wars.'” </p>

<p> Decades after Darth Vader threw his master down an elevator shaft, the galaxy is still wracked by war. The Republic is still the Republic, but now they’re not-too-secretly financing the rebellion against the remnants of the Empire, which has been supplanted by something called the First Order. The Empire went into retreat in “Jedi” when Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) turned his father back toward the light side of The Force. But the Empire’s remnants were tenacious. Now that Luke has gone into hiding following a disastrous attempt to train a new class of Jedi, they’ve gained strength and audacity, and built a variation of the Death Star that’s embedded in a living planet—basically an artillery cannon with intergalactic range. The re-branded Imperials look and sound even more Nazi-like than the villains from the first trilogy. One of the only scenes where Abrams completely overdoes it (which is hard to do in a “Star Wars” movie) is the rally prior to the super weapon’s inaugural blast: the supreme commander of the First Order (Domnhall Gleeson) addresses tens of thousands of troops arranged in Leni Riefenstahl patterns, jamming his pasty face into the camera and practically spitting into the lens. </p>

<p> The plot kicks into gear on the surface of the desert planet Jakku. A wisecracking X-wing pilot named Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) acquires a fragment of a map that reveals Skywalker’s location from an Obi-Wan-like elder (Max von Sydow, groomed and costumed to resemble Alec Guinness). He hides it inside his trusty droid, BB-8, a rolling ball with a segmented head that can do dandy vaudeville double-takes, only to be captured by the film’s chief baddie, Kylo Ren (Adam Driver). Ren is an iron-masked, black-clad, homicidally depressed warrior who flies into room-destroying rages and speaks to the recovered helmet of Darth Vader like Hamlet addressing Yorick’s skull. When Ren removes his helmet to reveal Driver’s long face and watery eyes, we may feel as though we’re seeing the second coming of young Anakin Skywalker, who had good in him but gave in to adolescent power fantasies and let the Emperor corrupt him. “I can have anything I want,” Ren petulantly tells a captive who resists his mental probing. </p>

<p> In short order, we meet the film’s other new leads: Rey (Ridley), an orphaned scrap-metal scavenger, and the ex-Stormtrooper Finn (Boyega), a conscientious objector who went AWOL after watching Ren and his storm trooper armada carry out a My Lai-style massacre while searching for BB-8 and his map. Then Rey, Finn and BB-8 escape a strafing run by TIE fighters by piling into Han’s old ship, the Millennium Falcon, which just happens to be owned by one of Rey’s scrap metal customers, and get captured by a freighter that just happens to be piloted by Han and Chewie, who just happen to be searching for the Falcon in that part of space. As in every “Star Wars” film, this one leans on chance meetings and coincidences, and you just have to accept them as the sort of things that would happen in a fairy tale or opera—or at the very least, as proof that the galaxy is smaller than it looks. The Starkiller Base is ten times the size of the last Death Star, but key characters cross paths inside of it so regularly that it might as well be a U-boat. </p>

<p> The map hidden inside BB-8 is this film’s equivalent of the Death Star plans hidden in R2-D2 in “A New Hope”; Jakku is basically Tatooine; other planets evoke icy Hoth from “The Empire Strikes Back” and the tropical moons of “A New Hope” and “Return of the Jedi.” Wrecked star destroyers poke up through sand dunes; a leathery-skinned reptilian pachyderm jams its snout into a watering hole; TIE fighters loom against boiling sunsets; a thousand-year old temple crumbles beneath an onslaught of laser bolts. This stuff might seem like fan fiction illustrated by calendar art if Abrams didn’t balance spectacle with feeling. Rey is the new Luke, but also the new Han, while Finn is a combination of Luke, Han Solo and a C-3PO worrywart. (“Stay calm,” Finn says during a tense walk alongside Poe. “I am calm,” Poe snarls. “I’m talking to myself,” Finn explains.) But even though Finn is the film’s funniest character, the script never goes so far as to turn him into mere comic relief. Nor does it permit Rey to become a glorified ingenue. Finn and Rey are tormented by believable personal demons and wield their blasters and lightsabers with fervor. You believe they could hold their own against Ren, who can stop blaster bolts in mid-air and spelunk inside prisoners’ minds. And you believe in the reality of CGI’d supporting characters as well, including Andy Serkis’ Supreme Leader Snoke, a gollum-esque dictator with a hideous puckered mouth whose hologram image is the size of the Lincoln Memorial, and Lupita Nyong’o’s Maz Kanata, a diminutive, ancient pirate whose goggled eyes can see into people’s souls. </p>

<p> Elsewhere, Abrams proves that that he’s given as much thought to the larger cultural meanings of “Star Wars” as to its iconic characters, gadgets and spaceships. Many film historians have noted the way Lucas’s first film, which came out two years after the end of US involvement in Vietnam, flipped that war’s script upside-down, making defeated Americans identify with “rebels” who were essentially Vietcong-like guerrillas, and root against an industrialized military whose literally-scorched-earth tactics were all too Western. A shot of a storm trooper roasting a hut with a flamethrower brings the original trilogy’s Vietnam obsession full-circle (to Iraq, maybe), even as the dogfights—many of which are conducted within planetary atmospheres—reconnect “Star Wars” with the propellers-and-goggles adventures that enthralled Lucas as a child. Like the movie’s countless references to other “Star Wars” setpieces—including both Death Star battles, the Dagobah tree scene from “Empire,” and the creature menageries of “A New Hope,” “Jedi” and “Attack of the Clones”—the historical allusions never overwhelm the basic story, which is very much in the spirit of the 1977 original: a bunch of nobodies end up saving the galaxy, with a mighty assist from a wise elder. </p>

<p> While Finn staggers to an animal trough to desperately slake his thirst, he notices thugs attempting to steal a BB unit droid, which Finn recognizes as BB-8, from a woman, Rey, but she fends them off with her staff. BB-8 notices Finn, wearing his master Dameron's jacket, prompting Rey to chase after him. Rey attacks Finn, believing him to be a thief. Finn explains that he had met and helped Poe escape the Resurgent Star Destroyer, but that Dameron had apparently perished during their crash. The First Order tracks Finn to the settlement, and launches an airstrike in attempt to search for BB-8 and the map. Rey, Finn, and BB-8 attempt to flee towards a Quadjumper, but TIE/fo fighters destroy it. With only one option left, the trio manages to escape in the Millennium Falcon. Rey flies it through the Graveyard of Giants, while Finn fires on and destroys the pursuing TIE fighters. With the TIE fighters destroyed, they escape into space. </p>

<p> Unfortunately, Han's freighter, the Eravana, is boarded by two notorious criminal factions, the Guavian Death Gang and Kanjiklub, both of whom want their money back from Solo. Not wanting Rey and Finn to be involved, Han hides both of them in the lower corridors of the freighter while he and Chewie go meet with the criminals, with BB-8 accompanying them. Han tries but fails to convince both parties that he would fix things eventually, with the Guavian Death Gang negotiator, Bala-Tik, recognizing the BB-8 astromech droid from a First Order bounty placed on it. They demand that Han hand over the droid and any stowaways he might have on board. As the scuffle continues, Rey accidentally releases three rathtars. The rathtars provide a distraction for Han and Chewie to escape, but one catches Finn and drags him around the freighter. Rey finds a control panel and shuts a blast door on the rathtar, freeing Finn. The two join Han and Chewie and successfully jump to hyperspace in the Falcon. Bala-Tik then orders his men to inform the First Order that Han Solo and the BB unit are aboard the ship. </p>

<p> Upon touching the lightsaber, she receives a series of visions. Rey sees Cloud City and sees that there Luke duelled Darth Vader. She sees Luke placing his metallic hand on top of R2-D2 near a fire, (presumed to be Luke's burning Jedi temple). Next, she is lying on the ground, in the rain at night. Corpses lay around the Knights of Ren who slaughtered these victims. Kylo Ren notices and comes toward her. Before he reaches her, she sees herself as a child yelling, to her parents to stay on Jakku. When her parents were leaving Jakku, Unkar Plutt told her to quiet herself. Next, she sees Ren is chasing her in a snowy forest, in the future. Rey pulls herself out of the vision in terror. After the vision, she finds Kanata standing outside the room. Kanata explains to her the lightsaber's history and that it was calling to her. Kanata then reveals that she herself is Force-sensitive; although she was never a Jedi, she can simply close her eyes and feel the light of the Force within herself, and recognizes that Rey can do this too. Frightened by her vision, Rey runs into the woods with BB-8. </p>

<p> Left alone and aware of what just happened, Rey realizes it is as Kanata told her: she truly is Force-sensitive. She attempts to use a Jedi mind trick on her stormtrooper guard, to make him release her and leave the door open. It doesn't work, but Rey tries again: this time he walks over and tells her he will tighten her restraints instead of undoing them. Concentrating, Rey tries one last time, and the stormtrooper listens to her demands. She quickly also remembers to have him drop his blaster as he leaves so she can arm herself. Rey then makes her way through Starkiller Base, honing her Force abilities while using stealth. She also draws on her experience climbing through wrecked Imperial starships to make her way through the bowels of the installation's machinery. Meanwhile, Kylo reveals to Snoke that Rey is strong with the Force but untrained, and Snoke commands Kylo to bring Rey to him. When Kylo discovers that Rey escaped, he throws another fit of rage, slashing at her empty restraint chair. </p>

<p> Seeing this, Han, Chewbacca, Finn, and Rey try to create an opening by planting thermal detonators inside the base. Sensing his father's presence, Kylo goes to meet Han. Han then confronts his son, Kylo Ren, calling to him by his birth name, "Ben". They approach each other on a bridge over a large pit, and Han pleads with his son to reject Snoke and return to the light side of the Force. Ben, removing his mask and seeming regretful and scared, holds out his lightsaber to Solo, asking for his father's help. Han replies that he would do anything for him, but when he tries to take the lightsaber from Ben's hand, he resists. Ben twists the angle of the hilt and ignites the weapon through Han's chest. Witnessed by Rey, Finn, and Chewbacca, Han strokes his son's face for the last time, before falling to his death. Enraged, Chewbacca, Rey, and Finn start firing at Ren and the stormtroopers. As the firefight rages, back on D'Qar Leia has to sit down when she feels Han die through the Force, squeezing her eyes shut against the tears. Chewbacca injures Ren with his bowcaster, but Ren chases them out of the base and catches up to Finn and Rey in the forest. </p>

<p> Lucasfilm confirmed on November 9 that pre-production had begun on Star Wars: Episode VII, and that screenwriter Michael Arndt would write the script for the film.[12] By this time, Arndt had already turned in a forty- to fifty-page story treatment[13][14][15] At some point, Lucas's story outlines were set aside,[16] and a writer's room of sorts was assembled at a Santa Monica hotel. Those present included Arndt (still writing the script), Kiri Hart, Lawrence Kasdan, Kathleen Kennedy and Simon Kinberg.[17][18][11] According to Kasdan, the sessions went on for months with little progress.[17] Abrams later described them as "a ton of ideas and outlines, a lot of cards on the wall, a lot of writing on whiteboards."[19] Lucas was asked to be a consultant,[7] but he stepped away due to Disney's decision to take the story in a different direction than his original outlines.[20][21] He later elaborated in an interview with Stephen Colbert: "The original saga was about the father, the children, and the grandchildren. I don't think that's a secret to anybody—that's in the novels—and the children were in their 20s and everything. But they've taken it in a different direction, and I'm excited—they didn't use my story, so I don't know what they're doing."[22] </p>

<p> Arndt worked on the script throughout 2013.[23] Arndt was told to focus on the female lead, but he had difficulty balancing this with the prominence of Luke, so the creative team decided to remove Luke from most of the film and make him the character everyone was looking for.[24] Eventually, Arndt was let go, and Kasdan was asked to co-write the script with J.J. Abrams (who had been announced as the film's director[25]), for which they were allowed creative freedom to come up with a story.[26] In November 2013, Abrams and Kasdan started a new script, incorporating ideas that they each liked from the think tank. As Abrams told Vanity Fair, "We said, Blank page. Page one. What do we desperately want to see?"[19] Referring to the writer's room sessions, Kasdan told craveonline.com "…for nine months you talk about something, and then you go off and start from scratch again. You don't flush, you know?"[11] Their writing process involved meeting up at cafes and restaurants and going on long walks through various major cities around the world—during which Abrams recorded their conversations on his phone.[27][19] They had put together a script by January 2014, though they were still working on major story elements even after production began that May.[19] They were under pressure to deliver a script in a relatively short period of time, and some of the higher-ups reportedly requested that the film be delayed into 2016.[23] (Kennedy was among those who objected to the original May 2015 release date.[19]) Kasdan's son Jon had uncredited writing contributions to the script,[28] and Episode VIII director Rian Johnson requested Abrams change the ending by having R2-D2 (not BB-8) come to Ahch-To and for Luke not to be floating boulders as originally intended.[29][30] </p>

<p> The Force Awakens began preliminary shooting in April 2014,[32][33] with second-unit work taking place in Iceland and Abu Dhabi.[34][35][36] On April 25, Lucasfilm announced their plans for a new continuity that excluded the existing Expanded Universe, and confirmed that Episode VII and its sequels would not adhere to any existing continuity.[37] This was followed on April 29 by the official release of the cast list for the movie. Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Harrison Ford, Kenny Baker, Peter Mayhew, and Anthony Daniels would return to reprise their roles as the main characters of the original trilogy, and they would be joined by a number of new actors in leading roles: John Boyega, Daisy Ridley, Adam Driver, Oscar Isaac, Andy Serkis, Domhnall Gleeson, and Max von Sydow.[38] Hamill remarked on returning to Star Wars: "Part of the experience of [Star Wars] in my life was coming down from that, putting it behind me. We had a beginning, middle, and an end. And I certainly, in a million years, never expected to return. I thought, even if they do more trilogies, my story is over."[39] Denis Lawson was asked to reprise his role as Wedge Antilles from the original trilogy, but declined, initially stating that it would have "bored" him,[40] but later claiming that he had been busy on another project.[41] </p>

<p> Principal photography was announced on May 10, 2013, and began on May 16, 2014 at the UK's Pinewood Studios.[42][43][44][45] For visual inspiration, Abrams looked at films directed by John Ford, Akira Kurosawa, and Terrence Malick.[46] Daniel Mindel—who had previously worked with Abrams as director of photography—returned to collaborate with the director on the film.[47] Reportedly, one sequence was shot with IMAX cameras.[48][49] Although Peter Mayhew was able to reprise the role as Chewbacca,[50] some scenes had to be shot with a stunt double, due to Mayhew's age and physical health.[51] On June 11, the 71-year old Harrison Ford broke his left leg when a hydraulic door at Pinewood Studios fell down and hit him, and was airlifted to John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford.[52] His recovery forced him to drop out of filming for eight weeks.[53] Abrams also sustained a minor back injury when he tried to help lift the door off of Ford's leg.[54] On June 28, actor Andy Serkis confirmed that The Imaginarium Studios would be involved with performance capture on the film, as well as all future Star Wars projects. Serkis also confirmed that the character he plays in the film would utilize performance capture.[55] On July 6, Lucasfilm confirmed that actors Crystal Clarke and Pip Andersen were cast in the film through open casting calls in the United Kingdom. They also revealed that production would take a two-week hiatus in August to accommodate Harrison Ford's leg injury. Afterwards shooting would resume, and conclude later in the fall.[56] </p>

<p> Some members of the cast and crew also participated in an official press conference on December 5.[99] The film had its red-carpet premiere on December 14 at Hollywood Boulevard.[100] The event was streamed live on StarWars.com.[101] The cast (including the droids) participated in an a cappella medley of the music from the series with Jimmy Fallon and The Roots on The Tonight Show.[102] Ford and Abrams participated on a sketch on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert depicting what convinced Ford to return: Colbert allegedly almost convinced Abrams to recast the role of Han with him.[103] Later, when he appeared on Conan, he was asked to sign producer Jordan Schlansky's LEGO Millennium Falcon and "accidentally" dropped it.[104] Abrams made a cameo on a May 2016 episode of The Late Late Show with James Corden, in which he appeared in the backseat of a car and directed "Chewbacca Mom" Candace Payne on how to properly use a Chewbacca mask.[105] </p>

<p> On May 21, 2014, Disney, Lucasfilm, and Bad Robot announced "Force for Change," a charity campaign "dedicated to finding creative solutions to some of the world's biggest problems"; initially, the campaign was focused on contributing to UNICEF. Each person who donated was entered to win a set visit to and appearance in Episode VII.[106] On August 11, Denver, Colorado resident D.C. Barns was announced as the contest's winner.[107] J.J. Abrams later released a YouTube video in which he announced that the contest had raised $4.26 million.[108] In August 2014, several of the film's cast and crew participated in the "Ice Bucket Challenge," an Internet phenomenon whereby one pours water onto one's head as a pledge to donate to the ALS association.[109] On April 21, 2015, Abrams appeared on Jimmy Kimmel Live!, where he performed the "Twizzler challenge" with Chewbacca, in honor of Autism Awareness Month.[110] In August 2015, Lucasfilm and HP began a two-month program called "Art Awakens," in which people submitted art inspired by The Force Awakens, of which a certain number were chosen for an art exhibit, the proceeds of which went to "Force for Change."[111] On November 5, 2015, director J.J. Abrams screened an unfinished version of the film for Daniel Fleetwood, a 32-year-old Star Wars fan with an aggressive form of cancer, who was likely to die before the film's release. The campaign for him to see the film was supported by several of the film's stars, including John Boyega, Mark Hamill, and Gwendoline Christie. Fleetwood passed away on November 9 or 10, 2015.[112] The film was also made available for viewing by astronauts on the International Space Station.[113] On November 28, it was revealed that R2-KT, the droid built in honor of Katie Johnson, would make an appearance in The Force Awakens.[114] Albin Johnson, founder of the 501st Legion and father of Katie, had constructed the droid after she was diagnosed with terminal brain cancer. In addition to R2-KT's appearance, a variation of the 501st's logo was featured as a flag outside Maz Kanata's castle.[115] </p>

<p> The Force Awakens was released in a Blu-ray combo pack and on DVD on April 5, 2016, with a digital version available four days earlier on April 1. Special features included deleted scenes, featurettes, and a feature-length documentary, Secrets of The Force Awakens: A Cinematic Journey. Various retailers also included exclusive content and/or packaging,[131] and one deleted scene was exclusive to the digital download.[132] On March 23, 2016, the film was leaked online prior to its original Blu-ray release and was downloaded more than two million times in twelve hours.[133] A 3D Collector's Edition was also released in late 2016, containing Blu-ray 3D, Blu-ray, Digital HD and DVD versions of the film. It included all of the bonus features from the original release, as well as an audio commentary by J.J. Abrams, additional deleted scenes, and additional behind-the-scenes conversations with cast and crew.[134] </p>

<p> Star Wars: The Force Awakens (also known as Star Wars: Episode VII – The Force Awakens) is a 2015 American space opera epic film directed, co-produced, and co-written by J. J. Abrams. The first installment of the Star Wars sequel trilogy, it stars Harrison Ford, Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Lupita Nyong'o, Andy Serkis, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Peter Mayhew, and Max von Sydow. Produced by Lucasfilm Ltd. and Abrams' production company Bad Robot Productions and distributed worldwide by Walt Disney Studios, The Force Awakens marks a break in creative control from the original series as the first Star Wars film not produced by franchise creator George Lucas. Set 30 years after Return of the Jedi, it follows Rey, Finn, and Poe Dameron's search for Luke Skywalker and their fight alongside the Resistance, led by veterans of the Rebel Alliance, against Kylo Ren and the First Order, a successor group to the Galactic Empire. </p>

<p> On October 30, 2012, Disney announced that it had purchased 20th Century Fox and Lucasfilm Ltd., the production company behind the creation of the Star Wars franchise, from its owner, Star Wars creator George Lucas, for $4.05 billion. The acquisition came in the wake of Lucas's announced retirement on May 31, and the subsequent June 1 announcement that veteran film producer Kathleen Kennedy was succeeding Lucas as Lucasfilm's Co-Chair. As part of the merger, Disney revealed that it planned to release a new sequel trilogy of films, beginning in 2015, that would include the long-awaited Star Wars Episodes VII, VIII, and IX. Lucas will remain involved as a creative consultant, with Kennedy serving as executive producer. Star Wars Episode VII has already been in development for several months as of the Disney–Lucasfilm merger. Lucas has written the story treatments for each of the three upcoming films. According to Kennedy, the development team is currently in the process of sitting down with writers to discuss story ideas. According to a Lucasfilm source, the basis for Star Wars Episode VII will be an original story, rather than taking inspiration from previous Expanded Universe content, such as author Timothy Zahn's Thrawn Trilogy of novels, which chronologically follows the events of Star Wars Episode VI: Return of the Jedi in the Star Wars canon. </p>

<p> Luke, Han, Chewbacca, and the droids, meanwhile, fall into a booby trap set by the Ewoks. R2-D2 cuts open the net, setting them free, but the Ewok tribe discovers C-3PO and proclaims him to be their god. The droid's Human and Wookiee friends are taken prisoner, and the Ewoks proclaim Han to be the main course in a banquet in C-3PO's honor. Discovered by Leia, Luke then uses the Force to levitate C-3PO to show off his "great magic." Convinced of the Rebels' good intentions, the Ewoks set them free and later that evening make them "part of the tribe," thereby agreeing to join the fight against the Empire. But Luke decides the time has come to leave Endor and face Darth Vader. Leia follows Luke out of the tribal gathering, whereupon he tells her that Vader is his father and she is his sister. Leia is utterly shocked, but accepts the truth. She is comforted by Han Solo. </p>

<p> The documentary Empire of Dreams states that George Lucas initially intended to call the film Return of the Jedi, but then changed it to Revenge of the Jedi when Lawrence Kasdan told him that "Return" was a weak title. On January 27, a few months before the movie released, Lucas announced that the film would be titled Return of the Jedi.[7] In interviews, Lucas said that the reason for the change is that a Jedi would not seek revenge. There are many, though, who speculate that George Lucas had planned to call the film Return of the Jedi all along, and only used "Revenge" as a means to throw off merchandise counterfeiters. It has also been claimed that, because the working title of Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan was The Vengeance of Khan, the title was changed because of its similarity to Revenge of the Jedi. In William Shatner's autobiography Star Trek Movie Memories, director Nicholas Meyer confirmed that he didn't believe that 20th Century Fox would allow Paramount to change his film's title from The Undiscovered Country to The Vengeance of Khan because of the making of Revenge of the Jedi. All of this potential controversy was erased when Star Trek II was retitled The Wrath of Khan and Revenge of the Jedi finally became Return of the Jedi. Part of the working title was reused for Episode III Revenge of the Sith. </p>

<p> The novelization of Return of the Jedi was written by James Kahn. While it contains many scenes that were deleted from the final cut, the release of Revenge of the Sith overturned Kahn's assertion that Anakin Skywalker remembers "lava crawling up his back." In the novelization of Return of the Jedi, Obi-Wan Kenobi recounts to Luke Skywalker that he and Anakin Skywalker had battled and that his father "fell into a molten pit." The novelization also refers to Owen Lars as Obi-Wan Kenobi's brother. Owen Lars was later established to be Anakin Skywalker's stepbrother. Incidentally, Joel and Nash Edgerton, Owen's portrayer and Ewan McGregor's stunt double, respectively, in the prequel trilogy, are brothers in real life. At the beginning of the confrontation in Darth Sidious's throne room, the Emperor reads Luke's mind and discovers that Yoda completed Luke's Jedi training, and that Yoda is now dead. However, he gives no sign of recognition on hearing Yoda's name. </p>

<p> As with the other two films of his original trilogy, Lucas issued a Special Edition of Return of the Jedi, released on theaters on March 14, 1997.[3] It makes a number of cosmetic changes and additions, including replacing a piece of music from the closing scene. In Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, Anakin Skywalker is played by Hayden Christensen. However, in the original and Special Edition version of Return of the Jedi, a much older actor named Sebastian Shaw played both the dying Anakin Skywalker and his Force spirit. In the DVD release, Anakin's ghost has become a young man, played by Christensen, and this is considered the canon version of the ghost. Lucas explains in the DVD commentary that Anakin has learned to control his life force beyond death, just as Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda had before him. (This is briefly explained in Revenge of the Sith.) So rather than appear as the older man who was Darth Vader, Anakin is able to return to the young man he once was before turning to the dark side. </p>

<p> Despite the Walt Disney Company's 2012 purchase of Lucasfilm Ltd. and the release rights to all future Star Wars films, Fox was to retain original distribution rights to Star Wars: Episode IV A New Hope, which they co-produced and co-financed, in perpetuity in all media worldwide. Fox was also to retain theatrical, nontheatrical, and home-video rights worldwide for the franchise's five subsequent films, which Lucasfilm produced and financed independently, through May 2020, at which time ownership was to transfer to Disney. This complex relationship between Fox and Disney, particularly in regards to Fox's perpetual rights to Episode IV, was to create an obstacle for any future boxed set comprising all nine films.[14] On December 14, 2017, The Walt Disney Company announced that it was acquiring most of Fox's parent company, 21st Century Fox, including the film studio and all distribution rights to A New Hope.[15] On March 20, 2019, the deal was officially completed.[16] On April 12, 2019, a Blu-ray box set containing the nine main installments of the Star Wars saga remastered in 4K was reportedly announced to be in development for a 2020 release.[17] </p>

<p> In the commentary for the 2004 DVD release, Lucas explained that the Ewoks were an allegory for a technologically primitive force overcoming a powerful Empire, and compared it to examples like the Vietnam War, Attila the Hun and the Roman Empire, and the American Revolutionary War. The Making of Star Wars: The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film reveals that the idea emerged and evolved from Lucas's interest in the Vietnam War in making Apocalypse Now, in which specifically the less technologically advanced Vietcong overcame the United States.[19] This has been criticized by some, such as conservative commentator Bill Whittle, in the webseries Afterburner episode "Han Shot First," for its perceived offensive connotations and morally ambiguous implications.[20] However, in the contemporary documentary From Star Wars to Jedi: The Making of a Saga, Lucas states that the Vietnam War was merely the inspiration from which the subplot evolved, rather than a political thesis. However, a note in the 1973 draft for A New Hope (then simply called Star Wars) did make clear that the events of the film were inspired by "a large technological empire going after a group of freedom fighters" in a clear allusion to the events of Vietnam.[19] </p>

<p> The Empire Strikes Back, also known as Star Wars: Episode V – The Empire Strikes Back, is a 1980 American epic space opera action film directed by George Lucas and co-directed by Irvin Kershner and written by George Lucas Leigh Brackett and Lawrence Kasdan, based on a story by George Lucas. Produced by Lucasfilm and distrbuted by 20th Century Fox, it is the second film in the Star Wars film series (and the fifth chronologically) and the sequel to Star Wars (1977). Set three years after the events of the first film, the plot sees the Galactic Empire hunting the scattered Rebel Alliance throughout the galaxy. While Darth Vader relentlessly pursues Luke Skywalker's friends—Han Solo, Princess Leia, and Chewbacca—Luke studies the Force under Jedi Master Yoda to prepare himself for his upcoming confrontation with Vader. The ensemble cast includes Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Billy Dee Williams, Anthony Daniels, David Prowse, Kenny Baker, Peter Mayhew, and Frank Oz. </p>

<p> Vader intends to hold Luke in suspended animation by imprisoning him in carbonite, selecting Han to be frozen as an experiment. Han survives the process and is given to Fett, who plans to collect a bounty on him from Jabba the Hutt. Lando, still loyal to Han, frees Leia and Chewbacca, but they are too late to stop Fett from departing with Solo. Under attack from stormtroopers, they fight their way back to the Falcon and flee the city. Meanwhile, Luke arrives and engages Vader in a lightsaber duel that leads them over the city's central air shaft. Vader severs Luke's right hand, disarming him, and tempts him to embrace his anger and join the dark side. Luke claims that Vader killed his father, but Vader reveals that he is Luke's biological father. Disbelieving the truth, Luke drops into the air shaft and is ejected beneath the floating city, where he grabs hold of an antenna. He reaches out telepathically to Leia, who senses him and persuades Lando and Chewie to turn back. After Luke is brought aboard, they are chased by TIE fighters towards Vader on his Star Destroyer and find that the Falcon's hyperdrive has been sabotaged, but R2-D2 reactivates it, allowing them to escape. </p>

<p> George Lucas's Star Wars, released in May 1977, was an unexpected box office success and quickly became a pop-culture phenomenon. Lucas, who did not expect the success, stopped doing publicity after a while because it became too overwhelming, and had flown to Hawaii with friend Steven Spielberg to begin conceptualising their next blockbuster franchise, Indiana Jones. The success of Star Wars and its licensing opportunities meant that a sequel was inevitable. Sequels were generally not well regarded at the time and Lucas was not ready to commit, as the production of the original film "had been a four-year horrific seat-of-the-pants experience"—one that Lucas never wanted to experience again. However, the film did not represent what he had envisioned, and he knew that a sequel would allow him to finish the story. Additionally, Lucas had already established the Star Wars universe, so he figured a sequel would provide an opportunity to introduce more ideas and adventures. "I always felt if I could go back to those environments using the same characters, I could make a helluva better movie," he said. Lucas hired Alan Dean Foster, the ghostwriter of the Star Wars novelization, to write the sequel novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye so it could be adapted as a low-budget film if Star Wars was a box-office failure, but by August 1977 Star Wars was still the number-one film in cinemas, motivating Lucas to continue the saga. </p>

<p> The world premiere of The Empire Strikes Back was held on May 17, 1980, at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C. (as a special Children's World Premiere event). The film had a Royal Charity Premiere in London at the Odeon Cinema in Leicester Square on May 20. The special event was dubbed "Empire Day", a playful take on the British Commonwealth Day holiday (known as Empire Day prior to 1958), where legions of stormtroopers were unleashed across the city. A series of other charity benefit premieres were held in numerous locations on May 19 and 20. The film went on to official general release in North America and the U.K. on May 21, 1980. The first wave of release included 126 70 mm prints, before a wider release in June 1980 (which were mostly 35 mm prints). Lucas added three shots to the film's ending before the latter release. During the initial theatrical run in Europe and Australia, the short film Black Angel by Star Wars art director Roger Christian was shown before the feature. </p>

<p> Initial critical reception of The Empire Strikes Back was divided, with some critics dismissing the film and others celebrating it. For example, Vincent Canby of The New York Times wrote a largely dismissive review of the film, saying "it is nice and inoffensive and, in a way that no one associated with it need be ashamed of, it's also silly. Attending to it is a lot like reading the middle of a comic book." David Denby of New York magazine called the film "a Wagnerian pop movie—grandiose, thrilling, imperiously generous in scale, and also a bit ponderous". Judith Martin of The Washington Post criticized the film's "middle-of-the-story" plot, which she claimed had no particular beginning or end. However, this was a concept that Lucas had intended. James Harwood of Variety wrote, "'The Empire Strikes Back' is a worthy sequel to 'Star Wars,' equal in both technical mastery and characterization, suffering only from the familiarity with the effects generated in the original and imitated too much by others." Gene Siskel of the Chicago Tribune gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four and stated that although the film "has some poor special effects" and that Lando Calrissian "isn't given enough screen time to develop into anyone special," he found these weaknesses "trivial compared to the strengths of the film, which are considerable and sometimes even majestic. </p>

<p> Shows: Star Wars: The Clone Wars • Star Wars Rebels (videography) • Star Wars: Forces of Destiny • Star Wars Resistance • The Mandalorian • Star Wars: The Bad Batch • Star Wars: Visions • The Book of Boba Fett • Obi-Wan Kenobi • Andor • Tales of the Jedi • Star Wars: Young Jedi Adventures • Ahsoka • The Acolyte • Star Wars: Lando • Star Wars: Rangers of the New Republic • Skeleton Crew Games: Star Wars Battlefront II • Club Penguin Star Wars Takeover • Star Wars Battlefront • Star Wars: Tiny Death Star • Star Wars: Assault Team • Angry Birds Star Wars • Angry Birds Star Wars II • Star Wars: Scene Maker • Star Wars: Commander • Disney Infinity: 3.0 Edition • Star Wars: Uprising • Star Wars Rebels: Recon Missions • Star Wars: Mobile App • LEGO Star Wars:The Force Awakens • Star Wars: Force Arena • Star Wars Battlefront II • Disney Magic Kingdoms • Roblox • Star Wars: Squadrons • The Sims 4 Star Wars: Journey to Batuu • Star Wars Jedi: Survivor Books: Star Wars The Adventures of Luke Skywalker, Jedi Knight • Ahsoka • Star Wars: Bloodline • The Art of Rogue One: A Star Wars Story • Battlefront II: Inferno Squad • Lost Stars • Star Wars: The High Republic • The Art of Star Wars: The Force Awakens • The Art of Star Wars: The Last Jedi • The Art of Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker Comics: Marvel Comics • Star Wars Adventures • Star Wars: Forces of Destiny Cancelled projects: Star Wars: Attack Squadrons • Rogue Squadron • Untitled Kevin Feige Star Wars film </p>

<p> Meanwhile, Luke arrives at Cloud City and falls into Vader's trap. Luke and Vader engage in a lightsaber duel that leads them over the city's central air shaft. Vader severs Luke's right hand, disarming him, and reveals himself to be Luke's father, contrary to Obi-Wan's statement that Vader killed his father. Horrified by this, Luke refuses Vader's offer to rule the galaxy at his side and throws himself down the air shaft. He slides through a tube system and is ejected beneath the floating city, where he grabs onto an antenna. He makes a desperate telepathic plea to Leia, who senses it and persuades Lando to return for him. R2-D2 repairs the Falcon‍ '​s hyperdrive, allowing them to escape. Aboard a medical frigate, Luke is fitted with a robotic artificial hand. Lando and Chewbacca set off in the Falcon to find Jabba the Hutt and Boba Fett in an attempt to save Solo. Luke, Leia, R2-D2, and C-3PO look on and await their contact. </p>

<p> That afternoon, Vader enters a carbon-freezing chamber intending to freeze Luke Skywalker once he arrives. The Dark Lord uses the opportunity for Boba Fett to deliver Solo to Jabba the Hutt (to whom Han owed a debt) by testing the device on Solo himself. Han and company enter the chamber for the experiment. At first, Chewbacca resists the stormtroopers, but Han restrains him, saving his strength for another time. Han says goodbye to Leia with a passionate kiss before he is escalated into the carbon freezing chamber. When he is successfully entombed in carbonite in a state of suspended animation, Vader hands over Han to bounty hunter Boba Fett for transportation to Tatooine to receive a bounty from Jabba. One of the Imperial commanders informs Vader that Luke's starfighter has arrived on Bespin. The Dark Lord orders Lando to take Leia, Chewbacca, and C-3PO to the Executor, reneging on a deal he made with Calrissian. However, the Cloud City administrator has other plans. </p>

<p> We don't know the exact recording schedule for Empire, but we know it was recorded on December 27th, 28th, 29th of 1979, and January 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 17th, and 18th of 1980.[12] Once again, the score was recorded with the London Symphony Orchestra at Anvil Scoring Stage by engineer Eric Tomlinson, and his assistant Alan Snelling. This time, the score was recorded with an upgraded Neve mixing console supporting 24 channels, that was hooked up to a 24-track 2" MCI recorder using Dolby A. Instead of recording the live mix to the multi-track masters like he had with Star Wars, Tomlinson recorded his live mix for Empire to an 8-track Struder A80 machine also using Dolby A. The first 6 tracks were used for his live surround mix, and the 8th channel had a film synchronization tone. The 7th channel was left empty to prevent cross-talk. No 35mm magnetic film master was created for the Empire sessions, unlike for the original Star Wars.[10] </p>

<p> The world premiere of The Empire Strikes Back was held on May 17, 1980, at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C. (as a special Children's World Premiere event).[3] The film had a Royal Charity Premiere in London at the Odeon Cinema in Leicester Square on May 20th. The special event was dubbed "Empire Day," a playful take on the British Commonwealth Day holiday (known as Empire Day prior to 1958), where legions of stormtroopers were unleashed across the city.[19] A series of other charity benefit premieres were held in numerous locations on May 19 and 20. The film went on to official general release in North America and the U.K. on May 21, 1980. The first wave of release included 127 70 mm prints of the film,[3] before a wider release in June 1980 (which were mostly 35 mm prints).[20] A tv documentary entitled Star Wars: Music by John Williams was released to coincide with the film. Similarly, in September 1980, CBS aired the official making-of documentary, SPFX: The Empire Strikes Back. </p>

<p> Despite the Walt Disney Company's 2012 purchase of Lucasfilm and the release rights to all future Star Wars films, Fox was to retain original distribution rights to Star Wars: Episode IV A New Hope, which they co-produced and co-financed, in perpetuity in all media worldwide. Fox was also to retain theatrical, nontheatrical, and home video rights worldwide for the franchise's five subsequent films, which Lucasfilm produced and financed independently, through May 2020, at which time ownership was to transfer to Disney. This complex relationship between Fox and Disney, particularly in regards to Fox's perpetual rights to Episode IV, was to create an obstacle for any future boxed set comprising all nine films.[26] On December 14, 2017, The Walt Disney Company announced that it was acquiring most of Fox's parent company, 21st Century Fox, including the film studio and all distribution rights to A New Hope.[27] On March 20, 2019, the deal was officially completed.[28] On April 12, 2019, a Blu-ray box set containing the nine main installments of the Star Wars saga remastered in 4K was reportedly announced to be in development for a 2020 release.[29] </p>

<p> In the scene where Han Solo is about to go after Luke Skywalker on a tauntaun, a dead tauntaun is seen on the floor being examined by 2-1B, the medical droid. On the wall is what appears to be some blood, presumably from the dead animal. In the fourth draft of the script, one of the rebels says to his deck officer, "...I can't imagine, sir. Their necks are broken." (The script refers to three dead creatures, not one.) The wampas have already broken into the base at this point and have obviously attacked some tauntauns. They break in once around the time of Han and Leia's argument in the hallway (see the picture below from the comic adaptation) and again when C-3PO and R2-D2 are walking towards the hangar and commenting about the temperature in Leia's chamber. Later, when Han is wondering where Luke is, he comes across the Rebels examining the dead tauntaun. They are wondering what happened to this creature as they have no idea yet that wampas have infiltrated the base. It can be noted however, that this scenario is present in the instant action mode of Star Wars: Battlefront II. </p>

<p> Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back is an American science fiction/fantasy film directed by Irvin Kershner. It was released theatrically in the United States on May 21st, 1980. It is the second film in the original Star Wars trilogy following the 1977 smash hit Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope (which at the time was simply known as just Star Wars). In terms of chronology, it is the fifth film in the "Star Wars Saga" and is followed by the 1983 movie Star Wars Episode VI: Return of the Jedi. The official novelization of the film was written by Donald F. Glut and released by Ballantine Books on April 12th, 1980. The film was also adapted in issues 39-45 of the original Star Wars comic book series by Marvel Comics and in Manga style in 1999 in the four-issue Star Wars Manga: The Empire Strikes Back limited series. The official soundtrack was released by RSO Records in 1980 and featured original music from the film composed by John Williams and conducted by the London Symphony Orchestra. The film is also noteworthy for introducing many new characters, many of whom become staples of the franchise such as Boba Fett, an armored bounty hunter who is on the hunt for Han Solo, Lando Calrissian, the suave administrator of Cloud City who also shares a tumultuous history with Solo. Yoda, a wise Jedi master show instructs Luke in the ways of the Force and most importantly, the Emperor, a character who was referenced in the previous film, but makes his first official introduction to the series with Empire. (See New characters for more details) </p>

<p> Few were confident in the film's box office prospects. It was released in a small number of theaters in the United States on May 25, 1977, and quickly became a surprise blockbuster hit, leading to it being expanded to a much wider release. Star Wars opened to positive reviews, with praise for its special effects. It grossed $410 million worldwide during its initial run, surpassing Jaws (1975) to become the highest-grossing film until the release of E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982); subsequent releases have brought its total gross to $775 million. When adjusted for inflation, Star Wars is the second-highest-grossing film in North America (behind Gone with the Wind) and the fourth-highest-grossing film of all time. It received Academy Awards, BAFTA Awards, and Saturn Awards, among others. The film has been reissued many times with Lucas's support, including the 1981 reissue giving the film the subtitle Episode IV – A New Hope, and the 1997 "Special Edition". The reissues have contained many changes, including new scenes, visual effects, and dialogue. </p>

<p> The droids are captured by Jawa traders, who sell them to the moisture farmers Owen and Beru Lars and their nephew, Luke Skywalker. While Luke is cleaning R2-D2, he discovers a recording of Leia requesting help from a former ally named Obi-Wan Kenobi. R2-D2 goes missing, and while searching for him, Luke is attacked by Sand People. He is rescued by the elderly hermit Ben Kenobi, who soon reveals himself to be Obi-Wan. He tells Luke about his past as one of the Jedi Knights, former peacekeepers of the Galactic Republic, who drew mystical abilities from the Force but were exterminated by the Empire. Luke learns that his father, also a Jedi, fought alongside Obi-Wan during the Clone Wars until Vader, Obi-Wan's former pupil, turned to the dark side of the Force and murdered him. Obi-Wan gives Luke his father's lightsaber, the signature weapon of the Jedi. R2-D2 plays Leia's full message, in which she begs Obi-Wan to take the Death Star plans to Alderaan and give them to her father, a fellow veteran, for analysis. Luke initially declines Obi-Wan's offer to accompany him to Alderaan and learn the ways of the Force, but he is left with no choice after Imperial stormtroopers murder his family and destroy his home while searching for the droids. Seeking a way off the planet, Luke and Obi-Wan travel to the city of Mos Eisley and hire Han Solo and Chewbacca, pilots of the starship Millennium Falcon. </p>

<p> Lucas completed a second draft in January 1975 entitled Adventures of the Starkiller, Episode One: The Star Wars. He had made substantial simplifications and introduced the young, farm-dwelling hero as Luke Starkiller. In this draft, Luke had several brothers. Annikin became Luke's father, a wise Jedi Knight who played a minor role at the end of the story. Early versions of the characters Han Solo and Chewbacca were present, and closely resemble those seen in the finished film.[55] This draft introduced a mystical energy field called "The Force," the concept of a Jedi turning to the dark side, and a historical Jedi who was the first to turn, and who subsequently trained the Sith. The script also included a Jedi Master with a son who trains to be a Jedi under his father's friend; this would ultimately form the basis for the finished film and, later, the original trilogy.[52][56] This version was more a fairy tale quest than the action-filled adventure story of the previous draft, and ended with a text crawl that previewed the next story in the series. According to Lucas, the second draft was over 200 pages long, which led him to split up the story into multiple films spanning multiple trilogies.[57] </p>

<p> On February 27, 1975, Fox granted the film a budget of $5 million, which was later increased to $8.25 million.[49]: 17:30 Lucas then started writing with a budget in mind, conceiving the cheap, "used" look of much of the film, and—with Fox having just shut down its special effects department—reducing the number of complex special effects shots called for by the script.[73] The finalized third draft, dated August 1, 1975, was titled The Star Wars From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller. This version had most of the elements of the final plot, with only some differences in the characters and settings. It presented Luke as an only child whose father was already dead, and who was cared for by a man named Ben Kenobi.[52] This script would be rewritten for the fourth and final draft, dated January 1, 1976, and titled The Adventures of Luke Starkiller as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I: The Star Wars. Lucas's friends Gloria Katz and Willard Huyck helped him revise the fourth draft into the final pre-production script.[74] </p>

<p> Lucas recognized that he needed an established star to play Obi-Wan. He considered Cushing for the role, but decided the actor's lean features would be better employed as the villainous Tarkin.[94] The film's producer, Gary Kurtz, felt a strong character actor was required to convey the "stability and gravitas" of Obi-Wan.[49] Before Guinness was cast, the Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune—who stars in many Akira Kurosawa films—was considered for the role.[82] His daughter, Mika Kitagawa, said her father "had a lot of samurai pride" and turned down the roles of Obi-Wan and Vader because he thought Star Wars would employ cheap special effects and would therefore "cheapen the image of samurai".[95] Lucas credited Guinness with inspiring the cast and crew to work harder, which contributed significantly to the completion of filming.[96] Ford said he admired Guinness's preparation, professionalism and kindness towards the other actors. He recalled Guinness having "a very clear head about how to serve the story."[49] On top of his salary, Guinness received 2.25% of the film's backend grosses, which made him wealthy later in life.[97] </p>

<p> According to Taylor, it was impossible to light the Elstree sets in the conventional way. He was forced to break open the walls, ceilings and floors, placing quartz lamps inside the openings he created. This lighting system gave Lucas the ability to shoot in almost any direction without extensive relighting.[132] In total, filming in Britain took fourteen and a half weeks.[127] While visiting an English travel agency, Lucas saw a poster depicting Tikal, Guatemala, and decided to use the location for the moon Yavin 4.[134] The scenes of the Rebel base on Yavin were filmed in the local Mayan temples. The animation of the Death Star plans shown at the base were created by computer programmer Larry Cuba, using the GRASS programming language. It is the only digital computer animation utilized in the original version of Star Wars.[135] The visual simulation of Yavin 4 orbiting its mother planet was created on the Scanimate analog computer. All the other computer monitors and targeting displays in the film featured simulated computer graphics, which were generated using pre-digital animation methods, such as hand-drawn backlight animation.[136][137] </p>

<p> Jympson's rough cut of Star Wars (often called the "Lost Cut") differed significantly from the final version. Author David West Reynolds describes Jympson's version as "more leisurely paced", and estimates that it contained 30–40% different footage from the final cut. Although most of the differences relate to extended scenes or alternate takes, there were also scenes which were completely removed to accelerate the pace of the narrative.[149] The most notable of these were a series from Tatooine, when Luke is first introduced. Set in the city of Anchorhead, the scenes depicted Luke's everyday life among his friends, and showed how their lives are affected by the space battle above the planet. These scenes also introduced Biggs Darklighter, Luke's closest friend who leaves to join the Rebellion.[150] Hirsch said the scenes were removed because they presented too much information in the first few minutes of the film, and they created too many storylines for the audience to follow.[151] The removal of the Anchorhead scenes also helped distinguish Star Wars from Lucas's previous film; Alan Ladd called the deleted scenes "American Graffiti in outer space".[150] Lucas also wanted to shift the narrative focus to C-3PO and R2-D2 at the beginning of the film. He explained that having "the first half hour of the film be mainly about robots was a bold idea."[152][153] </p>

<p> For the film's US release, Fox commissioned a promotional poster from the advertising agency Smolen, Smith and Connolly. The agency contracted the freelance artist Tom Jung, and gave him the phrase "good over evil" as a starting point. His poster, known as Style 'A', depicts Luke standing in a heroic pose, brandishing a shining lightsaber above his head. Leia is slightly below him, and a large image of Vader's helmet looms behind them. Some Fox executives considered this poster "too dark" and commissioned the Brothers Hildebrandt, a pair of well-known fantasy artists, to modify it for the UK release. When Star Wars opened in British theaters, the Hildebrandts' Style 'B' poster was used on cinema billboards. Fox and Lucasfilm later decided to promote the film with a less stylized and more realistic depiction of the lead characters, and commissioned a new design from Tom Chantrell. Two months after Star Wars opened, the Hildebrandts' poster was replaced by Chantrell's Style 'C' version in UK cinemas.[g] </p>

<p> Two weeks after its release, Lucas's film was replaced by William Friedkin's Sorcerer at Mann's because of contractual obligations. The theater owner moved Star Wars to a less-prestigious location after quickly renovating it.[196] After Sorcerer failed to meet expectations, Lucas's film was given a second opening at Mann's on August 3. Thousands of people attended a ceremony in which C-3PO, R2-D2 and Darth Vader placed their footprints in the theater's forecourt.[197][49] By this time, Star Wars was playing in 1,096 theaters in the United States.[198] Approximately 60 theaters played the film continuously for over a year. In May 1978, Lucasfilm distributed "Birthday Cake" posters to those theaters for special events on the one-year anniversary of the film's release.[199][200] Star Wars premiered in the UK on December 27, 1977. News reports of the film's popularity in America caused long lines to form at the two London theaters that first offered the film; it became available in 12 large cities in January 1978, and additional London theaters in February.[201] </p>

<p> Star Wars remains one of the most financially successful films of all time. It earned over $2.5 million in its first six days ($13.3 million in 2024 dollars).[204] According to Variety's weekly box office charts, it was number one at the US box office for its first three weeks. It was dethroned by The Deep, but gradually added screens and returned to number one in its seventh week, building up to $7-million weekends as it entered wide release ($36.3 million in 2024 dollars) and remained number one for the next 15 weeks.[3] It replaced Jaws as the highest-earning film in North America just six months into release,[205] eventually grossing over $220 million during its initial theatrical run ($1.14 billion in 2024 dollars).[206] Star Wars entered international release towards the end of the year, and in 1978 added the worldwide record to its domestic one,[207] earning $314.4 million in total.[3] Its biggest international market was Japan, where it grossed $58.4 million.[208] </p>

<p> On July 21, 1978, while still showing in 38 theaters in the US, the film expanded into a 1,744 theater national saturation windup of release and set a new U.S. weekend record of $10,202,726.[209][210][211] The gross prior to the expansion was $221,280,994. The expansion added a further $43,774,911 to take its gross to $265,055,905. Reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612) brought its cumulative gross in the U.S. and Canada to $323 million,[212][213] and extended its global earnings to $530 million.[214] In doing so, it became the first film to gross $500 million worldwide,[215] and remained the highest-grossing film of all time until E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial broke that record in 1983.[216] </p>

<p> Star Wars received many positive reviews upon its release. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times called the film "an out-of-body experience".[223] Vincent Canby of The New York Times described it as "the most elaborate ... most beautiful movie serial ever made".[224] A. D. Murphy of Variety called the film "magnificent" and said Lucas had succeeded in his attempt to create the "biggest possible adventure fantasy" based on the serials and action epics of his childhood.[110] Writing for The Washington Post, Gary Arnold gave the film a positive review, calling it "a new classic in a rousing movie tradition: a space swashbuckler."[225] Star Wars was not without its detractors, however. Pauline Kael of The New Yorker said "there's no breather in the picture, no lyricism", and no "emotional grip".[226] John Simon of New York magazine also panned the film, writing, "Strip Star Wars of its often striking images and its highfalutin scientific jargon, and you get a story, characters, and dialogue of overwhelming banality."[227] </p>

<p> Gene Siskel, writing for the Chicago Tribune, said, "What places it a sizable cut above the routine is its spectacular visual effects, the best since Stanley Kubrick's 2001."[230][231] Andrew Collins of Empire magazine awarded the film five out of five and said, "Star Wars' timeless appeal lies in its easily identified, universal archetypes—goodies to root for, baddies to boo, a princess to be rescued and so on—and if it is most obviously dated to the 70s by the special effects, so be it."[232] In his 1977 review, Robert Hatch of The Nation called the film "an outrageously successful, what will be called a 'classic,' compilation of nonsense, largely derived but thoroughly reconditioned. I doubt that anyone will ever match it, though the imitations must already be on the drawing boards."[233] In a more critical review, Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader stated, "None of these characters has any depth, and they're all treated like the fanciful props and settings."[234] Peter Keough of the Boston Phoenix said, "Star Wars is a junkyard of cinematic gimcracks not unlike the Jawas' heap of purloined, discarded, barely functioning droids."[235] </p>

<p> The film continues to receive critical acclaim from contemporary critics. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 94% of 205 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 9.1/10. The website's consensus reads: "A legendarily expansive and ambitious start to the sci-fi saga, George Lucas opened our eyes to the possibilities of blockbuster filmmaking and things have never been the same."[245] Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 90 out of 100, based on 24 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".[246] In his 1997 review of the film's 20th-anniversary release, Michael Wilmington of the Chicago Tribune gave the film four out of four stars, calling it "[a] grandiose and violent epic with a simple and whimsical heart".[247] A San Francisco Chronicle staff member described the film as "a thrilling experience".[248] In 2001 Matt Ford of the BBC awarded the film five out of five stars and wrote, "Star Wars isn't the best film ever made, but it is universally loved."[249] CinemaScore reported that audiences for the film's 1999 re-release gave the film a "A+" grade.[250] </p>

<p> Lucas's screenplay was selected by the Writers Guild of America as the 68th greatest of all time.[274] In 1989, the United States Library of Congress named Star Wars among its first selections to the National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant"; at the time, it was the most recent film to be selected and it was the only film from the 1970s to be chosen.[275] Although Lucas declined to provide the Library with a workable copy of the original film upon request (instead offering the Special Edition), a viewable scan was made of the original copyright deposit print.[276][277] In 1991, Star Wars was one of the first 25 films inducted into the Producers Guild of America's Hall of Fame for setting "an enduring standard for American entertainment."[278] The soundtrack was added to the United States National Recording Registry 15 years later (in 2004).[279] The lack of a commercially available version of the 1977 original theatrical edit of the film since early '80s VHS releases has spawned numerous restorations by disgruntled fans over the years, such as Harmy's Despecialized Edition.[280] </p>

<p> Star Wars was re-released theatrically in 1978, 1979, 1981, and 1982.[282] The subtitles Episode IV and A New Hope were added for the 1981 re-release.[283][284][j] The subtitles brought the film into line with its 1980 sequel, which was released as Star Wars: Episode V—The Empire Strikes Back.[285] Lucas claims the subtitles were intended from the beginning, but were dropped for Star Wars to avoid confusing audiences.[286] Kurtz said they considered calling the first film Episode III, IV, or V.[287] Hamill claims that Lucas's motivation for starting with Episode IV was to give the audience "a feeling that they'd missed something". Lucas began with Episodes IV–VI, according to Hamill, because they were the most "commercial" sections of the larger overarching story.[288][72] Michael Kaminski, however, points out that multiple early screenplay drafts of Star Wars carried an "Episode One" subtitle, and that early drafts of Empire were called "Episode II".[72] </p>

<p> Star Wars was released on Betamax,[304] CED,[305] LaserDisc,[306] Video 2000, and VHS[307][308] during the 1980s and 1990s by CBS/Fox Video. The final issue of the original theatrical release (pre-Special Edition) on VHS occurred in 1995, as part of a "Last Chance to Own the Original" campaign, and was available as part of a trilogy set or as a standalone purchase.[309] The film was released for the first time on DVD on September 21, 2004, in a box set with The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, and a bonus disc of supplementary material. The films were digitally restored and remastered, and more changes were made by Lucas (in addition to those made for the 1997 Special Edition). The DVD features a commentary track from Lucas, Fisher, Burtt and visual effects artist Dennis Muren. The bonus disc contains the documentary Empire of Dreams: The Story of the Star Wars Trilogy, three featurettes, teaser and theatrical trailers, TV spots, image galleries, an exclusive preview of Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, a playable Xbox demo of the LucasArts game Star Wars: Battlefront, and a making-of documentary about the Episode III video game.[310] The set was reissued in December 2005 as a three-disc limited edition without the bonus disc.[311] </p>

<p> Star Wars and its subsequent film installments have been explicitly referenced and satirized across a wide range of media. Hardware Wars, released in 1978, was one of the first fan films to parody Star Wars. It received positive critical reaction, earned over $1 million, and is one of Lucas's favorite Star Wars spoofs.[333][334][335][336] Writing for The New York Times, Frank DeCaro said, "Star Wars littered pop culture of the late 1970s with a galaxy of space junk."[337] He cited Quark (a short-lived 1977 sitcom that parodies the science fiction genre)[337] and Donny & Marie (a 1970s variety show that featured a 10-minute musical adaptation of Star Wars guest starring Daniels and Mayhew)[338] as "television's two most infamous examples."[337] Mel Brooks's Spaceballs, a satirical comic science-fiction parody, was released in 1987 to mixed reviews.[339] Lucas permitted Brooks to make a spoof of the film under "one incredibly big restriction: no action figures."[340] In the 1990s and 2000s, animated comedy TV series Family Guy,[341] Robot Chicken,[342] and The Simpsons[343] produced episodes satirizing the film series. A Nerdist article published in 2021 argues that "Star Wars is the most influential film of all time" partly on the basis that "if all copies ... suddenly vanished, we could more or less recreate the film ... using other media," including parodies.[344] </p>

<p> Some critics have complained that Star Wars, as well as Jaws, "ruined" Hollywood by shifting its focus from "sophisticated" films such as The Godfather, Taxi Driver, and Annie Hall to films about spectacle and juvenile fantasy.[355] On a 1977 episode of Sneak Previews, Gene Siskel said he hoped Hollywood would continue to cater to audiences who enjoy "serious pictures".[356] Peter Biskind claimed that Lucas and Spielberg "returned the 1970s audience, grown sophisticated on a diet of European and New Hollywood films, to the simplicities of the pre-1960s Golden Age of movies ... They marched backward through the looking-glass."[355][194] In contrast, Tom Shone wrote that through Star Wars and Jaws, Lucas and Spielberg did not betray cinema, but instead "plugged it back into the grid, returning it ... to its roots as a carnival sideshow, a magic act, one big special effect", which amounted to "a kind of rebirth."[351] </p>

<p> More than twenty years after the release of Star Wars, Lucas created a prequel trilogy, consisting of the films The Phantom Menace (1999), Attack of the Clones (2002), and Revenge of the Sith (2005). The trilogy chronicles the history between Obi-Wan and Anakin Skywalker, and the latter's fall to the dark side and transformation into Darth Vader. The prequel trilogy was financially successful, but some of the plot threads and new characters polarized critics and fans.[369][370][371][372][373] After Lucas sold the Star Wars franchise to the Walt Disney Company in 2012, Disney developed a sequel trilogy, consisting of The Force Awakens (2015), The Last Jedi (2017), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).[374][375][376][377][378] Original trilogy cast members including Ford, Hamill, and Fisher reprised their roles, alongside new characters portrayed by Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Adam Driver, and Oscar Isaac.[379] In 2016, Disney released the standalone film Rogue One, which depicts the successful Rebel attempt to steal the Death Star plans. It serves as a direct prequel to Star Wars, ending where Star Wars begins. Other standalone films and television series have also been released.[380][381][382][383][384] </p>

<p> This is the Star Wars film you've been looking for. That's not just a flippant pun, it's a profound and unshakable feeling that hits as the credits roll at the end of The Force Awakens, a literal cliff-hanger that blasts open the treasured sci-fi universe for an no-doubt never-ending future of stories. The Force Awakens is everything you ever loved about Star Wars: it's thrilling, beautiful, and evocative. It has timeless characters, lightsabers, comic robots, dashing rogues and dark lords. It has lightspeed jumps and Jedi mind-tricks; spaceship battles and a masterful John Williams score. It is concentrated kerosene for a child's imagination (pause to take in the looks on kids' faces as they leave the cinema). It is also a curious thing: a film so slavish to the original, that its only real constraint is the weight of fan expectations. The Force Awakens might have been the best Star Wars film ever, if it wasn't so devoted to being exactly what we want it to be. </p>

<p> Welcome to the expansive universe of Star Wars, a captivating saga that began with George Lucas's groundbreaking 1977 film. This epic space opera has since expanded into a vast universe of movies, TV series, books, comics, and video games. The original trilogy, prequel trilogy, and sequel trilogy form the backbone of this universe, introducing iconic characters like Luke Skywalker, Darth Vader, Princess Leia, Han Solo, and Yoda. The Star Wars universe also includes spin-offs like "Rogue One" and "Solo," animated series like "The Clone Wars" and "Rebels," and the critically acclaimed live-action series "The Mandalorian." The recent High Republic initiative has further expanded the lore, delving into a previously unexplored era of the Star Wars timeline. The Star Wars universe is a hotbed for fan theories, discussions, and artwork, with a passionate community that spans the globe. Fans delve into the intricacies of the Force, debate the merits of Jedi vs Sith, and create stunning fan art and cosplay. Whether you're a Padawan just beginning your journey or a Jedi Master well-versed in the ways of the Force, the Star Wars universe offers endless exploration and connection with fellow fans. May the Force be with you! </p>

<p> The Star Wars franchise depicts the adventures of characters "a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away"[2] across multiple fictional eras, in which humans and many species of aliens (often humanoid) co-exist with droids, which may be programmed for personal assistance or battle.[3] Space travel between planets is common due to lightspeed hyperspace technology.[4][5][6] The planets range from wealthy, planet-wide cities to deserts scarcely populated by primitive tribes. Virtually any Earth biome, along with many fictional ones, has its counterpart as a Star Wars planet which, in most cases, teem with sentient and non-sentient alien life.[7] The franchise also makes use of other astronomical objects such as asteroid fields and nebulae.[8][9] Spacecraft range from small starfighters to large capital ships, such as the Star Destroyers, as well as space stations such as the moon-sized Death Stars.[10][11][12] Telecommunication includes two-way audio and audiovisual screens, holographic projections, and hyperspace transmission.[13] </p>

<p> The universe of Star Wars is generally similar to the real universe but its laws of physics are less strict allowing for more imaginative stories.[14] One result of that is a mystical power known as the Force which is described in the original film as "an energy field created by all living things ... [that] binds the galaxy together".[15] The field is depicted as a kind of pantheistic god.[16] Through training and meditation, those whom "the Force is strong with" exhibit various superpowers (such as telekinesis, precognition, telepathy, and manipulation of physical energy);[17] it is believed nothing is impossible for the Force.[18] These superpowers are wielded by two major knightly orders at conflict with each other: the Jedi, peacekeepers of the Galactic Republic who act on the light side of the Force through non-attachment and arbitration, and the Sith, who use the dark side by manipulating fear and aggression.[19][20] While Jedi Knights can be numerous, the Dark Lords of the Sith (or 'Darths') are intended to be limited to two: a master and their apprentice.[21] </p>

<p> Untitled David Benioff and D. B. Weiss trilogy: In February 2018, it was announced that David Benioff and D. B. Weiss would serve as writers and producers on a trilogy of new Star Wars movies.[109] The plot would take place chronologically before the prequel trilogy, and center around the origin of the Jedi.[110] By May 2019, the duo were also slated to serve as co-directors of the first installment in their three films.[111] In October of the same year however, the filmmaking duo exited development of the projects due to scheduling conflicts with projects they are developing for Netflix. Kennedy stated that the studio is open to working with the duo, and developing their films once their schedule allows it.[112] In January 2024, the filmmaking duo announced that the working title was The First Jedi and would have followed the titular ancient protagonist. The pair cast doubt on returning to their planned trilogy, commenting on its apparent influence on James Mangold's similarly premised Dawn of the Jedi movie.[113] </p>

<p> From 1976 to 2014, the term Expanded Universe (EU) was an umbrella term for all officially licensed Star Wars storytelling material set outside the events depicted within the theatrical films, including novels, comics, and video games.[150] Lucasfilm maintained internal continuity between the films and television content and the EU material until April 25, 2014, when the company announced all of the EU works would cease production. Existing works would no longer be considered canon to the franchise and subsequent reprints would be rebranded under the Star Wars Legends label,[150] with downloadable content for the massively multiplayer online game The Old Republic the only Legends material to still be produced. The Star Wars canon was subsequently restructured to only include the existing six feature films, the animated film The Clone Wars (2008), and its companion animated series. All future projects and creative developments across all types of media would be overseen and coordinated by the story group, announced as a division of Lucasfilm created to maintain continuity and a cohesive vision on the storytelling of the franchise.[1] Multiple comics series from Marvel and novels published by Del Rey were produced after the announcement. Since the new canon has been introduced, there has been a multitude of pieces of Expanded Universe continuity that have become a part of canon.[151] </p>

<p> Marvel Comics published a Star Wars comic book series from 1977 to 1986.[182][183][184][185] Original Star Wars comics were serialized in the Marvel magazine Pizzazz between 1977 and 1979. The 1977 installments were the first original Star Wars stories not directly adapted from the films to appear in print form, as they preceded those of the Star Wars comic series.[186] From 1985 to 1987, the animated children's series Ewoks and Droids inspired comic series from Marvel's Star Comics line.[187][188][189] According to Marvel Comics former Editor-In-Chief Jim Shooter, the strong sales of Star Wars comics saved Marvel financially in 1977 and 1978.[190] Marvel's Star Wars series was one of the industry's top selling titles in 1979 and 1980.[191] The only downside for Marvel was that the 100,000 copy sales quota was surpassed quickly, allowing Lippincott to renegotiate the royalty arrangements from a position of strength.[192] </p>

<p> The saga draws heavily from the hero's journey, an archetypical template developed by comparative mythologist Joseph Campbell.[256] Each character—primarily Anakin, Luke, and Rey—follows the steps of the cycle or undergoes its reversal, becoming the villain.[259] A defining step of the journey is "Atonement with the Father".[260] Obi-Wan's loss of a father figure could have impacted his relationship with Anakin,[261] whom both Obi-Wan and Palpatine are fatherlike mentors to.[262] Luke's discovery that Vader is his father has strong repercussions on the saga and is regarded as one of the most influential plot twists in cinema.[263] Supreme Leader Snoke encourages Kylo Ren to kill his father, Han Solo.[257] Kylo uses the fact that Rey is an orphan to tempt her into joining the dark side.[264] According to Inverse, the final scene in The Last Jedi, which depicts servant children playing with a toy of Luke and one boy using the Force, symbolizes that "the Force can be found in people with humble beginnings."[265] </p>

<p> Political science has been an important element of Star Wars since the franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a struggle between democracy and dictatorship. Battles featuring the Ewoks and Gungans against the Empire and Trade Federation, respectively, represent the clash between a primitive society and a more advanced one, similar to the Vietnam-American War.[266][267] Darth Vader's design was initially inspired by Samurai armor, and also incorporated a German military helmet.[268][269] Originally, Lucas conceived of the Sith as a group that served the Emperor in the same way the Schutzstaffel (SS) served Adolf Hitler, but this was condensed into one character in the form of Vader.[270] Stormtroopers borrow the name of World War I German "shock" troopers. Imperial officers wear uniforms resembling those of German forces during World War II,[271] and political and security officers resemble the black-clad SS down to the stylized silver death's head on their caps. World War II terms were used for names in the films; e.g. the planets Kessel (a term that refers to a group of encircled forces) and Hoth (after a German general who served on the snow-laden Eastern Front).[272] Shots of the commanders looking through AT-AT walker viewscreens in The Empire Strikes Back resemble tank interiors,[273] and space battles in the original film were based on World War I and World War II dogfights.[274] </p>

<p> Some critics have blamed Star Wars and Jaws for "ruining" Hollywood by shifting its focus from "sophisticated" films such as The Godfather, Taxi Driver, and Annie Hall to films about spectacle and juvenile fantasy, and for the industry shift from stand-alone, one and done films, towards blockbuster franchises with multiple sequels and prequels.[303] One such critic, Peter Biskind, complained, "When all was said and done, Lucas and Spielberg returned the 1970s audience, grown sophisticated on a diet of European and New Hollywood films, to the simplicities of the pre-1960s Golden Age of movies... They marched backward through the looking-glass."[303][304] In an opposing view, Tom Shone wrote that through Star Wars and Jaws, Lucas and Spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: they plugged it back into the grid, returning the medium to its roots as a carnival sideshow, a magic act, one big special effect", which was "a kind of rebirth".[302] </p>

<p> Frustrated that his story was too hard to understand, Lucas wrote a 13-page treatment called The Star Wars, which loosely based on the structure of Akira Kurosawa's The Hidden Fortress. By 1974, he had expanded the treatment into a rough-draft screenplay, which added elements such as the Sith and the Death Star, and once more had the protagonist as a young boy, named Annikin Starkiller. For the second draft, Lucas made heavy simplifications, and also introduced the young hero on a farm, with his name now Luke rather than Annikin. Luke/Annikin's father is still an active character in the story at this point, a wise Jedi knight, and "the Force" now became a supernatural power. The next draft removed the father character and replaced him with a substitute named Ben Kenobi, and in 1976 a fourth draft had been prepared for principal photography. The film was titled Adventures of Luke Starkiller, as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I: The Star Wars. During production, Lucas changed Luke's last name to Skywalker and altered the title to just The Star Wars and finally Star Wars. </p>

<p> At this point, Lucas was thinking of the film as the only entry that would be made—the fourth draft underwent subtle changes that made it more satisfying as a self-contained film that ended with the destruction of the Empire itself, as the Death Star was said to achieve; possibly this was a result of the frustrating difficulties Lucas had encountered in pre-production during that period. However, in previous times Lucas had conceived of the film as the first in a series of adventures. The second draft contained a teaser for a never-made sequel about "The Princess of Ondos," and by the time of the third draft some months later, Lucas had negotiated a contract that gave him rights to make two sequels. Not long after, Lucas met with author Alan Dean Foster and hired him to write these two sequels—as novels. The intention was that if Star Wars was successful—and if Lucas felt like it—the novels could be adapted into screenplays. He had also by this point developed a fairly elaborate backstory—though this was not designed or intended for filming; it was merely backstory. "The backstory wasn't meant to be a movie," Lucas has said. </p>

<p> When Star Wars was successful, and not just successful but the biggest hit ever made at that time, Lucas decided to use the film as a springboard for an elaborate serial, although he considered walking away from the series altogether. However, Lucas wanted to create an independent filmmaking center—what would become Skywalker Ranch—and saw an opportunity to use the series as a financing agent for him. Alan Dean Foster had already begun writing the sequel as a novel, but Lucas decided to disregard that for filming and create more elaborate film sequels; the book was released as Splinter of the Mind's Eye the next year. At first Lucas envisioned an unlimited number of sequels, much like the James Bond series, and in an interview with Rolling Stone in August of 1977 said that he wanted his friends to take a try directing them and giving unique interpretations on the series. He also said that the backstory where Darth Vader turns to the dark side, kills Luke's father and fights Ben Kenobi on a volcano as the Republic falls would make an excellent sequel. Later that year, Lucas hired sci-fi author Leigh Brackett to write "Star Wars II" with him. They held story conferences together, and in late November of 1977 Lucas had produced a handwritten treatment called The Empire Strikes Back. The story is very similar to the final film except Darth Vader does not reveal he is Luke's father. In the first draft that Leigh Brackett would write from this, Luke's father appears as a ghost to instruct Luke. </p>

<p> This new storyline where Vader was Luke's father had drastic effects on the series. Michael Kaminski argues in his book that it is unlikely that this was a plot point that had seriously been considered before 1978, or even thought of before then, and that the first film was clearly operating under an alternate storyline where Vader was separate from Luke's father; there is not a single reference to the Vader-as-father plot point before 1978. After the second and third drafts of The Empire Strikes Back, where Lucas first introduced this point, he reviewed the new backstory he had now created: Annikin Skywalker is Ben Kenobi's brilliant student, has a child (Luke) but is swayed to the dark-side by the Emperor (who was now a Sith and not just a politician), battles Ben Kenobi on the site of a volcano and is wounded but resurrected as Darth Vader; meanwhile, Kenobi hides Luke on Tatooine while the Republic becomes the Empire and Vader has hunted down the Jedi Knights. With this new backstory, Lucas decided to film this as a trilogy—moving The Empire Strikes Back from Episode II to Episode V in the next draft. Lawrence Kasdan, who had just completed writing Raiders of the Lost Ark, was then hired to write the next drafts, and was helped by additional input from director Irvin Kershner. Kasdan, Kershner, and producer Gary Kurtz saw the film as a more serious and adult film, which was helped by the new, darker storyline, and brought the series far away from the light adventure roots it had existed as only a year earlier. </p>

<p> In 1978, with George Lucas a millionaire, he began taking his screenplays for Episodes V and VI and turning them into films, as, despite later declarations, he was already developing the idea of a "trilogy of trilogies" of which Star Wars would have been only Episode IV.[5] In early 1978, Lucas began working on Star Wars: Episode V The Empire Strikes Back. Star Wars was also retitled Star Wars: Episode IV A New Hope. However, this time Lucas left the Director's Guild, and Irvin Kershner was the new director with Lucas as the producer. Filming began in mid to late 1978 with the snowy planet of Hoth scenes being filmed in Norway. However, during filming, as if a curse, Norway suffered their worst snowstorm in many years. Mark Hamill, who was still recovering from his car accident injuries, filmed in a scene in the snow while the crew stayed in their hotel rooms. After the filming there concluded, the next part of the filming process turned to Elstree Studios. </p>

<p> After getting a divorce in 1983 and losing much of his fortune, Lucas had no desire to return to Star Wars, and had unofficially canceled his sequel trilogy by the time of Return of the Jedi. However, the prequels, which were quite developed, remained fascinating to him. After Star Wars became popular once again, in the wake of Dark Horse's comic line and Timothy Zahn's Thrawn Trilogy novels, Lucas saw that there was still a large audience. His children had begun to grow older, and with the explosion of CG technology, he was now considering returning to directing. By 1993 it was announced, in Variety among other sources, that he would be making the prequels. He began outlining the story, now offering that Anakin Skywalker would be the protagonist rather than Ben Kenobi and that the series would be a tragic one examining his transformation to evil. He also began to change how the prequels would exist relative to the originals—at first they were supposed to be a "filling-in" of history, backstory, existing parallel or tangential to the originals, but now he began to see that they could form the beginning of one long story: beginning with Anakin's childhood and ending with Anakin's death. This was the final step towards turning the franchise into a "Saga." </p>

<p> In 1994, Lucas began writing the first screenplay, titled Episode I: The Beginning. At first the plan was to write and then film all three prequels at once, but this was changed, possibly because the writing process took much longer than first thought. Although Lucas initially planned on having others write and direct, he kept writing on his own, and eventually decided to direct the film as well. In 1999, Lucas announced he would be directing the next two films as well, and began working on Episode II at that time. The first draft of this was completed just weeks before principal photography, and Lucas hired Jonathan Hales, a writer from The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles, to polish his draft. Unsure of a title, Lucas had jokingly called the film Jar Jar's Big Adventure. By now the backstory had undergone large changes—Ben Kenobi had discovered Anakin as an adult in Episode I's first draft, but he was changed to be a young student, and Anakin a child, and in Episode II the Clone Wars were decided to be a personal manipulation of Palpatine's. At the time of the original trilogy, Lucas had many ideas for this war: in The Empire Strikes Back it was decided that Lando was a clone and came from a planet of clones that caused a war, but later a different version was decided wherein "Shocktroopers," including Boba Fett, waged war against the Republic from a distant galaxy but were then repelled by the Jedi Knights. </p>

<p> Lucas began working on Episode III even before Attack of the Clones was released, offering concept artists that the film would open with a montage of seven Clone War battles. As he reviewed the storyline that summer, however, he says he radically re-organized the plot. Michael Kaminski, in The Secret History of Star Wars, offers evidence that issues in Anakin's fall to the dark side prompted Lucas to make massive story changes, first revising the opening sequence to have Palpatine kidnapped and Dooku killed by Anakin as a first act towards the dark side. Lucas' first draft was written in 2003, and is largely similar to the film, though much simplified. After principal photography was complete in 2003, Lucas made even more massive changes in Anakin's character, rewriting his entire turn to the dark side—he would now turn out of a quest to save Padmé from dying, rather than the previous version where that was one of many reasons and genuinely believed that the Jedi were evil and plotting to take over the Republic. This fundamental rewrite was accomplished through editing and many new and revised scenes filmed in additional pick-ups in 2004. </p>

<p> George Lucas has often exaggerated the amount of material he had written for the series, most of these exaggerations stemming from the post-1978 period where the film grew into a true phenomenon. Lucasfilm often indicated that he had written twelve stories to be filmed, and Lucas was quick to tell how Star Wars was always Episode IV that was meant as a middle chapter. Lucas also began to claim that Darth Vader's parentage of Luke and redemption was always a major part of his plan from early on, and even that this was his very first script or treatment. As Jonathan Rinzler and Michael Kaminski show, this is demonstrably false. Kaminski rationalizes that these exaggerations are part publicity device and part security measure—with the series and story radically changing throughout the years, Lucas would emphasize that its current embodiment was the original intention; with the series previously existing as different and often contradictory forms, this makes audiences view the material only from the perspective that Lucas wishes them to view the material, and it also may protect against outrage that such a popular storyline was being changed post-release after being cherished by so many. </p>

<p> On January 23, 2017, the title for Episode VIII of the Star Wars saga was revealed to be The Last Jedi.[51] On March 3, the fourth season of Star Wars Rebels was confirmed, with the third season of ending on March 25 with the two part episode special "Zero Hour."[52][53] Celebration Orlando,[54] the largest Star Wars Celebration Event with 70,000 participants[55] took place from April 13 to April 16. The event celebrated the 40th Anniversary of Star Wars, with George Lucas, John Williams, and many others appearing to celebrate the occasion along with many panels and events.[54] On April 15, Filoni played the TV film debut of Rebels Season Four, Star Wars Rebels: Heroes of Mandalore, to Celebration participants.[56] On September 21, 2017, The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson revealed that post-production on the film was complete.[57] The Rebels Season Four film was later released on October 16, with the standard season airing weekly beginning on October 23.[58] </p>

<p> Another entry in the Star Wars Anthology Series was announced on June 4, 2014 and set to be directed by Josh Trank.[66] It was reported that the film would focus on legendary bounty hunter Boba Fett along with the cadre of bounty hunters from The Empire Strikes Back.[67] The film was scheduled to be announced at a panel in Celebration Anaheim in April 19, 2015, but was instead reorganized to focus on the upcoming Rogue One film.[68] On May 1, 2015, however, Lucasfilm announced that Trank had departed the project on the second Anthology film.[69] Lucasfilm President Kathleen Kennedy remarked that the film was one that Lucasfilm wanted to continue developing further but had been postponed.[70] Solo: A Star Wars Story was moved up to release in 2018, with Trank's film shifting to 2020.[71] In August 17, 2017, it was reported the film would focus on Obi-Wan Kenobi.[72] No film was released in 2020,[73] with Lucasfilm shifting to streaming.[74] </p>

<p> On February 6, 2018, Lucasfilm announced that Game of Thrones series creators D.B. Weiss and David Benioff were set to write and create a Star Wars film series, and the two confirmed that they would begin work on the project once the eighth and final season of Game of Thrones aired.[75] On August 15, Lucasfilm art director Neil Lamont revealed that a film that featured Tatooine was in development[76] but was canceled.[77] On February 10, 2019, it was reported that the film series was a trilogy,[78] and that Benioff and Weiss were collaborating with The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson as he made his own Star Wars trilogy.[79] On May 7, Disney announced that the next three Star Wars films would release in 2023, 2025, and 2027.[80] On October 28, it was reported that Benioff and Weiss had exited the project to focus on new projects for Netflix.[81] </p>

<p> President Kathleen Kennedy's primary objective was to introduce a new era of films with the sequel trilogy. While the films earned billions at the box office, the fluctuating narrative was evident and led to what was known as "the hiatus," a gap in the Star Wars film planning which was announced in early 2019, months before the closing chapter of the sequel trilogy was released so that Lucasfilm could regroup. Kennedy stated that the company recognized that this time period was a new chapter for the company, and that they all needed to work together to create the architecture for the future. With the Star Wars anthology films, Lucasfilm had been releasing one film per year, and so Kennedy dissolved the annual deadlines and wanted to reconsider objectives. Kennedy believed that Star Wars required a greater degree of professional devotion from filmmakers. Kennedy remarked that anyone who went into the Star Wars universe needed to understand that it was a three to five year commitment, and that it required nurturing. Kennedy felt that in order to prepare for Disney+, their series had to feel as large as the films. As a result Kennedy turned to Jon Favreau.[74] </p>

<p> Favreau, who had worked with Disney on the ground-breaking visual effects films The Jungle Book and The Lion King, was always deeply interested in Star Wars as understood by Kennedy. Favreau had previously starred as a Mandalorian animated character in Star Wars: The Clone Wars. As a result, Favreau was the first person approached by Kennedy for this new era and demonstrated that not only was he interested, but he had an idea. For Kennedy, Favreau met the new criteria of hers, in that his sole focus was being committed to Star Wars. After meeting in Kennedy's office, Favreau began work without even having a contract in place and by the time he was hired he had already written the first four episodes for his series centered around a lone gunslinging Mandalorian. At the same time, Lucasfilm executive Dave Filoni approached Kennedy, and wanted a series focused on the Mandalorians as he wanted to explore some of the ideas that were never fully realized when developing The Clone Wars with George Lucas. Filoni began playing a critical role in Lucasfilm's new TV strategies, was indispensable as he channeled George Lucas, and Kennedy had been nurturing his filmmaking ambitions ever since she arrived in 2012.[74] </p>

<p> Lucasfilm has left behind several major cliffhangers set up in Solo: A Star Wars Story. The 2018 spinoff followed the early life of smuggler Han Solo, played as a young man by Alden Ehrenreich, as he first begins his life of crime, leading up to the events of the Original Trilogy. Unfortunately, the spinoff performed poorly at the box office, leading Lucasfilm to cancel any planned continuations of its story. This left several storylines unresolved, most notably including the surprise appearance of Darth Maul. After Han Solo and his allies defeat the ruthless criminal mastermind Dryden Vos, his former lieutenant Qi'ra makes contact with their kingpin, revealed to be none other than the Sith Lord Maul himself. Maul promises that he and Qi'ra will work together more closely in the coming days, as they strive to make Crimson Dawn the most powerful crime syndicate in the galaxy. Unfortunately, nothing ever came of this major sequel tease, causing this scene to become one of the most infamous in the history of Star Wars. For six years, fans have been left to wonder what might have been had a Solo sequel been able to explore Maul's plans and how they would intersect with the adventures of Han Solo. Now, Star Wars finally has an opportunity to resolve this long-gestating plotline. </p>

<p> Solo: A Star Wars Story's failure to follow up on its Darth Maul tease can finally be resolved in the Sith Lord's upcoming animated series. The show is set to focus on Maul's rise to power as a criminal mastermind, including the foundation of his Crimson Dawn syndicate. He was seen first beginning to put these pieces together in the final season of Star Wars: The Clone Wars. Maul: Shadow Lord will expand on Maul's criminal dealings, potentially including what he was really up to during the events of Solo. The renewed focus on Maul's storyline offers Lucasfilm an opportunity to plug up one of its most annoying plotholes, finally answering what fans have been wondering ever since 2018. This wouldn't be a new strategy on Lucasfilm's part, either. The studio has often used new projects to explain away inconsistencies or plot holes in previous movies. Rogue One infamously spawned from a desire to explain how the Rebels could destroy the Death Star in a single attack during the events of A New Hope. If Lucasfilm is willing to produce an entire movie to explain a plot hole in a forty-year-old movie, it is more than capable of creating an animated series to follow up on a sequel tease that never paid off. </p>

<p> Sam Witwer, the voice actor who will reprise his role as Darth Maul in the upcoming animated series, has confirmed that Maul: Shadow Lord takes place about one year after the events of Star Wars: The Clone Wars. This would mean that the show takes place about nine years before Maul's appearance in Solo: A Star Wars Story. However, this doesn't rule out the possibility of Shadow Lord eventually transforming into a Solo sequel. In its initial announcement, Lucasfilm did not confirm how many seasons are planned for the new series. Unlike other franchises like the MCU, Star Wars prefers to produce multi-season television shows, especially when it comes to animation. As such, it is safe to assume that Maul: Shadow Lord is planned to include multiple seasons. If this is the case, then the show could gradually cover the years leading up to the events of Solo, finally catching up to it and then continuing its story. The early seasons of Shadow Lord could follow Maul's ascension within the criminal underworld, including the foundation of Crimson Dawn and his first interactions with the likes of Dryden Vos and Qi'ra. Later seasons could cover larger periods, eventually bringing the series to 10 BBY and the events of Solo. From there, Shadow Lord could easily follow the continuing adventures of Darth Maul and Qi'ra, exploring how their exploits affect the likes of Han Solo and Lando Calrissian. </p>

<p> It's fantastic. So that's inspirational. I still take so much inspiration from all these things. Just because I work there doesn't mean I'm not like, wow, that's incredible. I'm marvel at what everybody else is accomplishing and I feed off of that and I use the challenge myself. So we'll see. Kathy [Kennedy] and I talk all the time and she and I are figuring out what should go and what goes next and what makes the most sense. And I love working with her. She's a great collaborator. And how spoiled am I to work with George Lucas and Kathleen Kennedy? That that's pretty great. And also I have Carrie Beck, she works in development. She produces on Ahsoka with me, but she's right there as well. And so we are figuring all these things out and looking at every project and yeah, it's like project development. They don't all develop at the same time. But in Star Wars it's tricky because you need certain things to go before one another if they're in the same space of the way the audience will perceive it, which is why, and I said this in an earlier interview, I really, I'm fascinated by what Kevin Feige was able to pull off. I think it's so special and so unique. The Marvel Cinematic Universe and what he was able to accomplish on a timeline and perfectly place all these elements. It's an incredible skill and a real... </p>

<p> Luke tries to make his way to Echo Base on foot, but he finds himself lost in the blizzard and collapses in the snow. Suddenly, he sees the Force spirit of Obi-Wan Kenobi appear before him. Ben tells Luke to go to Dagobahto undergo training under Yoda, a Jedi Grand Master. After the spirit disappears, Han arrives to find an almost unconscious Luke, who is mumbling indistinctly about Ben, Yoda and Dagobah. At this point, the tauntaun that Han was riding on collapses in the extreme cold. To keep Luke from freezing to death during the blizzard, Han uses Luke's lightsaber to cut open the dead tauntaun and places Luke in it. Han then sets about erecting a shelter that he and Luke will stay in during the night. They are forced to stay out during the night as the aircraft (snowspeeders) that the Rebels use for atmospheric flight had not yet been adapted for the extremely low temperatures of the Hoth night and are therefore unable to mount a rescue operation to retrieve Han and Luke. </p>

<p> Aboard the Executor, General Maximillian Veers notifies Vader that Admiral Ozzel has emerged from lightspeed too close to Hoth. Ozzel intended to catch the Rebels unaware before they could set up their defenses. However, Vader realizes that the Rebels have been alerted to the fleet's arrival. Via video communication, Vader Force chokes Ozzel to death for his incompetence, then appoints Captain Firmus Piett the new Admiral on the spot. As Vader previously ordered, the Imperial ground forces, commanded by General Veers, land outside the Rebels' shield and march overland to destroy the power generator. Princess Leia gives the Rebel fighters instructions on the evacuation to leave Hoth two to three ships at a time past the energy shield to a rendezvous point, which is beyond the outer rim. Rieekan lowers the shields to fire the Ion cannon at one of the Imperial Star Destroyers allowing the first transports to escape. The Rebel pilots assigned to hold off the Imperial ground assault depart the Hoth base for the oncoming battle against heavily equipped Imperial forces, who are armed with agile AT-STs (All Terrain Scout Transports) and monstrous AT-AT (All Terrain Armored Transport) walkers, led by General Veers. </p>

<p> Back on the Falcon, while Leia tries to make repairs, Han makes his move on the Princess, drawing himself closer to her before both end up in a passionate kiss. When Threepio arrives, Leia withdraws and walks away. Vader orders the entirety of Death Squadron to begin sweeping the asteroid field to find the Millennium Falcon As the search continues, the dangers of the field begin to take their toll: an asteroid smashes into the bridge tower of a Star Destroyer, presumably killing all aboard. On the Executor, Vader communicates with the captains of the other ships (the captain of the demolished star destroyer throws his arms up in horror, and the transmission fades). One officer, Captain Lorth Needa, tells Vader that they should consider their damage. Vader firmly replies that they will continue the search. Shortly afterward, Admiral Piett informs Vader that the Emperor commands he make contact immediately. Vader orders his ship out of the asteroid field for a clear transmission. In his private quarters, Vader receives a holographic message from Darth Sidious, who alerts the Dark Lord to a "new enemy who could destroy" the Empire - Luke Skywalker. Vader suggests that if Luke could be turned, he would be a "powerful ally". Sidious agrees, saying that Luke would be a "great asset" and asks his apprentice if it could be done. Vader declares Luke will join the Empire "or die". Instead of going straight to Yoda, Luke is brought to the creature's hut. Luke insists on going to find Yoda immediately, but the small creature only responds with "Not far. Yoda not far." The diminutive figure then declares the boy lacks patience, but the voice of Kenobi tells the figure that the boy will learn patience if he is to be trained. Only then does Luke realize that the small green figure is Yoda. Yoda asks Kenobi if he will finish whatever training he begins, then suspects that Luke will someday succumb to fear. </p>

<p> Back on the Star Destroyer, Vader enlists the bounty hunters, Boba Fett, Dengar, IG-88, Bossk, 4-LOM and Zuckuss to find the Millennium Falcon for a "substantial reward". One of the Imperial commanders finally spots the Falcon, leading to another pursuit which results in the Falcon eluding the Empire by making the insanely counter intuitive move of attacking the lead Star Destroyer. However, at the last moment, the ship veers off and secretly attaches itself to the rear of the cruiser's command tower, which is not extensively covered by sensors, making it appear to have vanished from the Destroyer's point of view. Days later, while training, Luke becomes distracted when he finds that his X-wing fighter has almost completely submerged into the swamp. Luke declares he will never be able to get the ship out, seeing that it is too big for him to extract from the water. Yoda says it is "no different, only different in your mind." Luke says he'll "try" to lift the ship, but Yoda says "No! Do or do not, there is no try." Luke tries to use the Force, but to no avail. Yoda reminds him that "size matters not" and gives him wisdom about the Force. Luke denies all of this, then Yoda decides to use the Force to lift the ship out himself. Luke is dumbfounded and incredulous. Yoda senses the youngster's failures within his mind. </p>

<p> That afternoon, Vader enters a carbon-freezing chamber intending to freeze Luke Skywalker once he arrives. The Dark Lord uses the opportunity for Boba Fett to deliver Solo to Jabba the Hutt (to whom Han owed a debt) by testing the device on Solo himself. Han and company enter the chamber for the experiment. At first, Chewbacca resists the stormtroopers, but Han restrains him, saving his strength for another time. Han says goodbye to Leia with a passionate kiss before he is escalated into the carbon freezing chamber. When he is successfully entombed in carbonite in a state of suspended animation, Vader hands over Han to bounty hunter Boba Fett for transportation to Tatooine to receive a bounty from Jabba. One of the Imperial commanders informs Vader that Luke's starfighter has arrived on Bespin. The Dark Lord orders Lando to take Leia, Chewbacca, and C-3PO to his Star Destroyer, reneging on a deal he made with Calrissian. However, the Cloud City administrator has other plans. </p>

<p> Disney began production on the film after they acquired Lucasfilm on October 30, 2012, Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy served as executive producer of the film, and George Lucas acted as a creative consultant for the films. As of January 25, 2013, J.J. Abrams directed and produced the film, while Michael Arndt wrote the screenplay. Episode VII is the first theatrical live-action Star Wars movie, since Revenge of the Sith, released ten years earlier. It was released to critical acclaim, making $2.068 billion (only the third film to do such) becoming the highest grossing Star Wars film not adjusted for inflation (adjusted it is the second highest) and the highest grossing film of 2015 and of all time in North America. It also is the most successful sequel of all time adjusted for inflation. Adjusted for inflation it is the second highest grossing Disney film behind Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. It is also the fourth highest grossing film of all time worldwide (behind Avengers: Endgame, Avatar, and Titanic) (third at the time of its release; behind Avatar and Titanic). </p>

<p> The group arrives on the planet Takodana, where they meet catina owner Maz Kanata, who offers assistance getting BB-8 to the Resistance. Finn, however, believes that there's no fight against the First Order that they can win, and decides to leave, revealing to Rey his former heritage as a First Order stormtrooper and his choice to leave, before telling Rey to take care of herself. Rey is drawn by the Force to a storeroom where she finds the lightsaber that once belonged to Luke and Anakin Skywalker. Upon touching it, she sees haunting visions involving her being left behind on Jakku as a child, the Knights of Ren slaughtering a group of people, Luke and his droid R2-D2 overlooking the Jedi Temple burning, and then she sees Kylo Ren in a forest covered with snow. Seeing how Rey is disturbed by the vision, Maz explains that the lightsaber is calling to her and that she has potential in the Force. Maz tells Rey that whoever she's waiting for on Jakku is never coming back, but someone still could. Upon hearing this Rey thinks that Luke might come back to help the galaxy in the fight. Maz urges her to take the weapon, but Rey chooses to flee, refusing to be part of the war. </p>

<p> On Starkiller Base, General Hux addresses First Order personnel and angrily declares the last day of the Republic, before using the weapon to destroy the New Republic capital, a catastrophe witnessed by everyone on Takodana. Finn chooses to stay upon also seeing the event, and Maz gives him Luke's lightsaber for safekeeping. The First Order descends on Takodana, tipped off to BB-8's presence. Han, Chewbacca, and Finn battle the First Order with the eventual help from a squadron of Resistance X-wings led by Poe, who survived the crash on Jakku. However, Rey is captured by Kylo and taken to Starkiller Base. After the battle, General Leia Organa arrives on Takodana along with C-3PO and reunites with Han, and they journey back to the Resistance base on D'Qar. There, Finn reunites with Poe, while Leia and Han talk about their son Ben's turn to the dark side, with Leia insisting that Snoke is to blame for seducing Ben and that there is still light in him, and that Han, as his father, can reach him. Also, C-3PO reveals to BB-8 that the droid R2-D2 has been dormant since Luke's disappearance. </p>

<p> Meanwhile, the injured Kylo chases Finn and Rey onto the surface, and the three engage in a lightsaber duel. Finn tries to fight him using Anakin's old lightsaber, but Kylo uses the Force to enhance his attack and grievously wound his opponent, but not before getting a shoulder wound. Kylo then attempts to call his grandfather's saber, but Rey manages to call it upon the Force, surprising him. Rey takes up the lightsaber and duels Kylo. Although Kylo initially has the upper hand, when he corners her on a rift, he asks her to be his apprentice. Rey takes advantage of this moment to gather her power in the Force. Rey eventually manages to overpower and disarm him, leaving him with a gruesome facial scar, they are then separated by a fissure as the planet begins to crumble. Snoke orders Hux to evacuate the base and bring Kylo to him, saying it's time to complete his training. Rey, Finn, and Chewbacca evacuate on the Falcon as Starkiller Base is destroyed. </p>

<p> The Force Awakens' first screenplay was written by Michael Arndt.[81] At the time of his hiring, Arndt was also tapped to pen story treatments for the following installments.[82] Arndt took part in a writers room with Simon Kinberg, Lawrence Kasdan, Pablo Hidalgo, and Kiri Hart to discuss and plan the overall trilogy.[83] Early drafts had Luke Skywalker appear midway through the film, but Arndt found that "every time Luke came in and entered the movie, he just took it over. Suddenly you didn't care about your main character anymore."[84] The writers decided to use Luke as the film's MacGuffin and, as something that the protagonists needed to find, would not appear in person until the final scene.[84] Arndt also developed some backstory elements for the returning characters from the original trilogy, such as how Leia was instrumental in rebuilding the Republic after the fall of the Empire before being discredited when it was publicly revealed that her biological father was Darth Vader (this would go on to become a central plot point in the canonical novel Star Wars: Bloodline).[85] </p>

<p> Several directors were considered, including David Fincher,[86] Brad Bird,[87] Jon Favreau,[88] and Guillermo del Toro.[89] Bird was reportedly the "top choice" to helm the film, but his commitments to Tomorrowland forced him to withdraw.[90] Matthew Vaughn was an early candidate for the job, even dropping out of X-Men: Days of Future Past in favor for the film.[91] Colin Trevorrow was also under consideration by the studio, while Ben Affleck and Neill Blomkamp passed on the project.[92][93][94][95] After a suggestion by Steven Spielberg to Kennedy,[96] J. J. Abrams was named director in January 2013,[97] with Lawrence Kasdan and Simon Kinberg as project consultants.[98] Kasdan worked to convince Abrams to direct the film after the filmmaker initially rejected the offer.[99][100] Arndt worked on the script for eight months, but said he needed 18 more, which was more time than Disney or Abrams could give him.[101] The production announced Arndt's exit from the project on October 24, 2013. That same day, Kasdan and Abrams took over script duties,[102] both of whom planned the story while walking in Santa Monica, California, New York City, Paris, and London. The first draft was completed in six weeks.[103] Abrams said the key to the film was that it return to the roots of the first Star Wars films and be based more on emotion than explanation.[104] In January 2014, Abrams confirmed that the script was complete.[105] In April 2014, Lucasfilm clarified that Episodes VII–IX would not feature storylines from the Star Wars expanded universe, though other elements could be included, as with the TV series Star Wars Rebels.[106] </p>

<p> In November 2015, Lucas recorded an hour-long interview with CBS News reporter Charlie Rose in which he said Disney had not been "keen" to involve him and conceded: "If I get in there, I'm just going to cause trouble because they're not going to do what I want them to do, and I don't have the control to do that any more, and all it would do is just muck everything up."[110] He also said, "They wanted to do a retro movie. I don't like that. Every movie, I worked very hard to make them different [...] I made them completely different—different planets, different spaceships to make it new."[111][112] In early December 2015, Kathleen Kennedy told The Hollywood Reporter that Lucas had seen the movie and "liked it".[113] In the same month, at the Kennedy Center Honors, Lucas stated, "I think the fans are going to love it, It's very much the kind of movie they've been looking for."[114] Abrams felt that, as the first in a new trilogy, the film "needed to take a couple of steps backwards into very familiar terrain" and use plot elements from previous Star Wars films.[115] </p>

<p> Beginning in September 2013, production spaces at the Bad Robot facility were converted for shooting of The Force Awakens for the benefit of shooting a minor portion of the film in the United States.[120] The film's costume designer was Michael Kaplan, who had previously worked with Abrams on the films Star Trek (2009) and Star Trek Into Darkness (2013).[121] Film editors Mary Jo Markey and Maryann Brandon, long-term collaborators with Abrams, were also signed.[122] In August 2013, it was announced that cinematographer Daniel Mindel would be shooting the film on 35 mm film (specifically Kodak 5219).[123] In October 2013, other crew members were confirmed, including sound designer Ben Burtt, director of photography Mindel, production designers Rick Carter and Darren Gilford, costume designer Michael Kaplan, special effects supervisor Chris Corbould, re-recording mixer Gary Rydstrom, supervising sound editor Matthew Wood, visual effects supervisors Roger Guyett, and executive producer Jason McGatlin.[124] </p>

<p> In April, Ridley, Boyega, Isaac, Driver, Serkis, Domhnall Gleeson, and Max von Sydow were announced as part of the cast; while Ford, Hamill, Fisher, Anthony Daniels, Peter Mayhew, and Baker reprised their roles from the original trilogy.[28] In June, cast additions Lupita Nyong'o and Gwendoline Christie were announced.[32] To prepare for his role, Hamill was assigned a personal trainer and a nutritionist at the request of the producers, who wanted him to resemble an older Luke.[157] Fisher was also assigned a personal trainer and a nutritionist.[157] Abrams initially considered using Daniels only in a voice role for C-3PO,[158] but Daniels opted to reprise the role physically as well; the production team built a new C-3PO costume to accommodate him.[159] A flashback scene was cut from Rey's vision (following her discovery of Luke's lightsaber), which would have featured Robert Boulter standing in for Luke as he appeared in his duel with Vader in The Empire Strikes Back.[160] </p>

<p> That same month, Harrison Ford fractured his leg while filming at Pinewood after a hydraulic door on the Millennium Falcon set fell on him, and was taken to a hospital. According to Abrams, Ford's ankle "went to a 90-degree angle".[101] Production was suspended for two weeks because of Ford's injury.[174] Ford's son Ben said the ankle would likely need a plate and screws and that filming could be altered slightly, with the crew needing to shoot Ford from the waist up for a short time until he recovered.[175] A month later, Jake Steinfeld, Ford's personal trainer, said Ford was recovering rapidly.[176] Abrams also suffered a fractured vertebra in his back when he was trying to help lift the door after Ford's accident,[101] but he kept this to himself for over a month.[177] In February 2016, it was reported that the Health and Safety Executive brought four criminal charges against Disney subsidiary Foodles Production (UK), Ltd. for alleged health and safety breaches relating to Ford's accident.[178] Foodles Production (UK) Ltd was subsequently fined $1.95 million in October 2016 for two health and safety breaches, after admitting the counts at an earlier hearing.[179] </p>

<p> Kennedy said The Force Awakens would use real locations and models over computer-generated imagery.[188] Johnson reiterated that Abrams would use little CGI and more practical, traditional special effects, saying: "I think people are coming back around to [practical effects]. It feels like there is sort of that gravity pulling us back toward it. I think that more and more people are hitting kind of a critical mass in terms of the CG-driven action scene lending itself to a very specific type of action scene, where physics go out the window and it becomes so big so quick."[189] Abrams' intention in prioritizing practical special effects was to recreate the visual realism and authenticity of the original Star Wars.[190] To that end, the droid BB-8 was a physical prop developed by Disney Research,[191] created by special effects artist Neal Scanlan and operated live on set with the actors.[192][193] The Holochess sequence was created using stop-motion, which was supervised by Tippett Studio and overseen by Phil Tippett, who also worked on the stop-motion sequence in the original Star Wars film.[194][195] </p>

<p> Disney backed The Force Awakens with extensive marketing campaigns.[214][215] Deadline Hollywood estimated the media value was $175 million;[216] its costs alongside home media revenues had later risen to $423 million by The Guardian.[217] On November 28, 2014, Lucasfilm released an 88-second teaser trailer. It was screened in selected cinemas across the United States and Canada and in theaters worldwide in December 2014. It was also released on YouTube and the iTunes Store,[218] generating 58.2 million views on YouTube in its first week.[219] Critics compared the brief footage favorably to the production values of the original trilogy. The Hollywood Reporter called the trailer "perfectly potent nostalgia", praising its mix of old and new.[220] Empire was impressed by the continuity with the first films—"the feel of classic Star Wars"—but noted the absence of Hamill, Ford, and Fisher and speculated about the significance of the new characters.[221] The Guardian wrote that the use of the Star Wars fanfare by John Williams reinforced brand loyalty among fans.[222] </p>

<p> On December 11, 2014, Abrams and Kennedy released a series of eight mock Topps trading cards revealing the names of several characters.[223] On April 16, 2015, a second teaser trailer, this one lasting two minutes, was shown at the opening panel at the Star Wars Celebration in Anaheim, California. Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy said the reaction to the trailer was "staggering [...] the entire room of almost eight thousand people just leapt to their feet and roared, I mean I can't think of anything I've ever been to—other than a rock concert—that felt quite like that".[224] The trailer was viewed over 88 million times within the first 24 hours of release.[225] The trailer shows many of the new characters and the first footage of Chewbacca and Han Solo. The Huffington Post's Graham Milne wrote that the trailer "was an affirmation of something that we'd long been told was never going to happen. This was a gift. This was faith rewarded. About damn time."[226] </p>

<p> Vanity Fair was the first magazine to release an exclusive cover issue devoted to The Force Awakens. The magazine, released on May 7, 2015, featured exclusive interviews and photos of the cast photographed by Annie Leibovitz.[227] At the 2015 San Diego Comic-Con, in addition to a panel with many of the actors, a behind-the-scenes look at the film demonstrated the film's use of practical sets and effects. It was positively received, with Nigel M. Smith of The Guardian writing: "The featurette's angle is a strong one and connects with fans of the original trilogy in an incredibly poignant way. It also does a sly job of teasing Fisher's new look as Leia and Simon Pegg's mysterious involvement as a rumored alien in the movie, without actually showing the actors in action." Smith compared the marketing strategy for the film to that of a previous Abrams film, Super 8, saying "the promos [...] are notable for what they tease, not what they give away."[228] </p>

<p> Walt Disney Studios and Lucasfilm presented a look at The Force Awakens at Disney's D23 Expo in August 2015.[229] Drew Struzan—who designed the poster artwork for the previous Star Wars films—produced a commemorative poster given to the event's attendees.[230] In October 2015, Lucasfilm unveiled the theatrical release poster and a third trailer. The poster omitted Luke Skywalker and revealed a Death Star-like "orb".[231] The trailer debuted during the halftime break of Monday Night Football, before being released online.[232] The reaction to the trailer by fans on social media was "frenzied", with Lizo Mzimba of the BBC writing that "perhaps the most significant thing about the final trailer before the film's release is how little of the story it reveals."[233] Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph felt the trailer was "a perfect blend of old and new, in keeping with the old-fashioned Star Wars aesthetic".[234] The trailer received 128 million views in 24 hours. 16 million of the views came from its airing on Monday Night Football.[235] At the end of October, Air France announced a "Flight and Cinema" package, providing customers who book select flights to Paris transportation to a theater to see the film, since France was one of the first countries to release the film.[236] On November 23, a partnership with Google was announced, in which Google users could choose to affiliate themselves with either the Dark or Light Side, which would change the appearance of their Google websites. Additionally, Disney teamed up with Verizon to create a virtual-reality experience for Google Cardboard.[237] </p>

<p> Disney Consumer Products and Lucasfilm announced that September 4, 2015 would be deemed "Force Friday" and would be the official launch of all the merchandise for The Force Awakens. Beginning at 12:01 am, fans could buy toys, books, clothing and various other products at Disney Stores and other retailers throughout the world.[242] Disney and Maker Studios hosted an 18-hour live-streaming presentation on YouTube, showcasing multiple merchandise products beginning on September 3, 2015.[243][244] Among these products were a remote-controlled BB-8 developed by Sphero.[191] Sphero had participated in a Disney-run startup accelerator in July 2014, where they were invited into a private meeting with Disney CEO Bob Iger, in which they were shown on-set photos and imagery of BB-8 before its public unveiling.[245][246] Many retailers, such as Toys "R" Us, were unable to meet demand for Star Wars products due to the event.[247] </p>

<p> In the United States and Canada, it had the widest release of December across 4,134 theaters,[257] of which 3,300 were 3D locations, a record 392 IMAX screens (13 of which were 70mm), 451 premium large format screens, 146 D-Box locations,[258][259] as well as releasing in the Dolby Vision format (high-dynamic range, Rec. 2020 color) in Dolby Cinema.[260] Worldwide, it was released across 940 IMAX theaters, a new record.[259] On December 18, 2015, the film began playing on every IMAX screen in the United States and Canada for four straight weeks up to January 14, 2016. This made it the first film since Warner Bros.' The Hobbit trilogy to receive such a release.[261] The film finally shed some of its IMAX screens with the release of The Revenant (2015) and The Finest Hours (2016) in mid-January 2016.[262] </p>

<p> Advance ticket sales for the film began on October 19, 2015,[263] and were in strong demand, resulting in online movie ticket sites crashing.[264][265] Vue Cinemas, the United Kingdom's third-largest theater chain, sold 45,000 tickets in 24 hours, 10,000 of which were sold in 90 minutes, a record for the theater.[266] In the United States, the film pre-sold a record-breaking $6.5 million worth of IMAX ticket sales on a single day. IMAX has never previously registered more than $1 million in pre-sales on a single day.[267] In total, it sold over $50 million in pre-sales, breaking the record.[268][269] This number was raised to $100 million including $50–60 million in advance ticket sales by December 14.[269][270] However, not all tickets that were pre-sold were for the film's opening weekend, with Fandango President Paul Yanover saying "people have set aside tickets for screenings in January, weeks after the big opening [...] We have people buying Star Wars [The Force Awakens] into 2016. It's not just an opening-weekend phenomenon."[268] Similarly, the film broke pre-sales records in the UK,[271] Canada,[272] and Germany.[273] </p>

<p> Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Star Wars: The Force Awakens through digital download and Disney Movies Anywhere on April 1, 2016, and on Blu-ray and DVD on April 5. Physical copies include behind-the-scenes featurettes, deleted scenes, interviews,[280] and additional footage with eight bonus features.[281] In its first week, The Force Awakens sold 669,318 DVDs and 3.4 million Blu-rays as the most sold film on both formats in the United States.[282] That same week, The Force Awakens topped the Nielsen VideoScan First Alert chart, which tracks overall disc sales, as well as the dedicated Blu-ray sales chart with 83% of unit sales coming from Blu-ray.[283] Overall, The Force Awakens sold 2.1 million DVDs and 5.9 million Blu-rays, adding them up to get a total of 8 million copies, and made $191 million through home media releases.[282] </p>

<p> Star Wars: The Force Awakens grossed $936.7 million in the United States and Canada and $1.132 billion in other countries for a worldwide total of $2.07 billion,[3] making it the highest-grossing film of 2015[289] and the third highest-grossing film of all time.[290] Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold close to 110 million tickets in the United States and Canada.[291] The Force Awakens earned 8.6% of the total 2015 releases in the United States and Canada, second only to the 8.8% of the box office earned by Titanic in 1997.[292] It was the 24th film in cinematic history to gross $1 billion worldwide, standing as the fastest film to surpass the mark at the time, doing so in 12 days.[293] It was also the third film in history to surpass $2 billion worldwide, doing so on its 53rd day of release.[294] Deadline Hollywood calculated the film's net profit as $780.1 million, accounting for production budgets[b], marketing, talent participations, and other costs; box office grosses and home media revenues placed it first on their list of 2015's "Most Valuable Blockbusters".[171] </p>

<p> In the United States and Canada, The Force Awakens was released on December 18, 2015. It made a record-breaking $57 million from Thursday night previews,[c] of which IMAX screenings generated a record-breaking $5.7 million from 391 screens.[304] On its opening day, the film grossed $119.1 million, marking the biggest single- and opening-day record[305] and the first time a film has earned more than $100 million in a single day.[306] Without Thursday-night grosses, the film earned the second-largest opening-day gross[307] and a record of $247.9 million for its opening weekend.[282] The debut was 19% bigger than the previous record holders The Avengers (2012) ($207 million) and Jurassic World (2015) ($208 million).[308] The opening weekend figure included an IMAX opening-weekend record of $30.1 million (12.65%) from 391 IMAX theaters,[309][310] which nearly amounts to the $252.5 million total earned by Return of the Jedi—the second-lowest-grossing film in the series—in its original run.[311] 2D screenings accounted for 53% of the total opening gross while 3D accounted for 47%. RealD 3D comprised $78 million of the opening gross, setting a new record.[309] At that time, the film had the biggest December opening weekend, breaking the previous record held by The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey (2012).[312] It would hold this record until it was surpassed by Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021) six years later.[313] Revenues in the film's second weekend decreased by only 39.8% in the United States and Canada, earning $149.2 million, to remain in first place at the box office[314] and recording the biggest second weekend of all time.[315] </p>

<p> Internationally, the film was released in over 30,000 screens.[324] It opened on December 16, 2015, in 12 international markets and earned $14.1 million on its opening day, debuting at first place in all of them.[325] It expanded in an additional 42 countries on December 17, generating $58.6 million for a two-day international total of $72.7 million, reaching first place in all 44 markets.[326] It grossed a total of $129.5 million in three days after adding $56.8 million on its third day,[326] and set a new midnight record in the United Kingdom with $3.6 million.[327] It broke opening-day records in the United Kingdom ($14.4 million), Germany ($7.1 million), Australia ($6.8 million),[304] Sweden ($1.7 million), Norway ($1.1 million),[325] and in 12 other countries.[327] Other markets which generated large opening days were Spain ($3.5 million) and Japan ($3 million).[326] After the five days, The Force Awakens had a total international opening gross of $281 million from 30,000 screens, a new record for December opening[324][328] and the third-biggest international opening of all time.[329] International markets generating opening-weekend tallies of at least $10 million were the United Kingdom ($50.6 million), Germany ($27.5 million), France ($22.5 million), Australia ($19.6 million), Japan ($13.4 million), and Russia ($12.3 million). The film had the biggest opening of all time in 18 countries including the United Kingdom, Germany, Australia, Russia, and Sweden.[324][330] </p>

<p> After five days, the film had a total worldwide opening record of $529 million from 74 territories, which was the biggest worldwide opening at that time, making it only the second time in cinematic history—after Jurassic World—that a film had opened to more than $500 million globally.[328][331] This included an IMAX opening record of $48 million.[331] Revenues from IMAX dipped slightly, generating $19 million in its second weekend, for a record total of over $70 million in 11 days.[332] IMAX generated $17.9 million from 276 IMAX theaters.[310] The film had a steeper decline in its second weekend, falling 51% to $136.9 million.[333] The film had an unsuccessful opening in India where it opened third against two local blockbusters with a mere $1.51 million.[334] As of February 2016, the highest-grossing markets outside of the United States and Canada were the United Kingdom ($180.7 million), China ($124.5 million), Germany ($109.7 million), Japan ($92.6 million), and France ($88.2 million).[335] On January 17, 2016, it passed the $1 billion mark overseas becoming the first film of Disney, the third film of 2015 and the fifth film overall to achieve this feat.[336] It topped the international box office chart for five consecutive weekends, becoming the first film since Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015) to have five straight wins, before being dethroned by The Revenant in its sixth weekend.[337] In Japan, it topped the box office for six straight weekends.[337] </p>

<p> Star Wars: The Force Awakens received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics.[338] On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 93% of 451 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.3/10. The website's consensus reads, "Packed with action and populated by both familiar faces and fresh blood, The Force Awakens successfully recalls the series' former glory while injecting it with renewed energy".[4] Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 80 out of 100, based on 55 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews.[339] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale; women, and people under the ages of 25 and 18 gave it an "A+", while 98% of audiences gave it either an "A" or a "B". Audiences polled by PostTrak gave the film an 88% "definite recommend" while 96% said it met or exceeded their expectations.[340] </p>

<p> Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph said the film "sets out to shake Star Wars from its slumber, and reconnect the series with its much-pined-for past", and "it achieves this both immediately and joyously is perhaps the single greatest relief of the movie-going year."[341] Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian said that it was "both a narrative progression from the earlier three films and a shrewdly affectionate next-gen reboot", and it was "ridiculous and melodramatic and sentimental, but exciting and brimming with energy and its own kind of generosity."[342] Variety's Justin Chang wrote that the film has "sufficient style, momentum, love, and care to prove irresistible to any who have ever considered themselves fans."[343] Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times described it as "a beautiful, thrilling, joyous, surprising, and heart-thumping adventure".[344] Ann Hornaday, writing for The Washington Post, thought the film had "enough novelty to create yet another cohort of die-hard fans", and the film struck "all the right chords, emotional, and narrative, to feel both familiar and exhilaratingly new."[345] The Charlotte Observer's Lawrence Toppman said Abrams had "pulled off a delicate balancing act, paying clever homage to the past."[346] Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the film his highest rating and called it "the best Star Wars sequel yet and one of the best films of 2015".[347] Frank Pallotta, reviewing the film for CNN Business, found it was the best Star Wars film since the original trilogy and that it "is bound to be a film experience long remembered by fans and non-fans alike".[348] </p>

<p> Tom Long of The Detroit News wrote that though some may find the film too similar to the original Star Wars, it leaves "the ungainly and unneeded clumsiness of the subsequent prequels far behind", and "the energy, humor, and simplicity of direction [has] been recaptured".[349] The Tribune-Star called it "basically the same" as the original film but "isn't that what we all wanted anyway?"[350] Stephanie Zacharek of Time wrote that Abrams had delivered "everything we expect, as opposed to those nebulous wonders we didn't know we wanted".[351] Reviewing for Forbes, Scott Mendelson cited the film's "top-tier production values and a strong sense of scale and scope", but felt it was so much "an exercise in fan service [that] it is only due to the charisma and talent of our newbies and J. J. Abrams' undeniable skill as a visual storyteller that the Mad Libs narrative doesn't outright destroy the picture."[352] Brian Merchant of Motherboard said that the film "is supposed to be all about exploring the unexplored, not rehashing the well-trod", and that "one of the most unabashedly creative enterprises of the 20th century has been rendered another largely enjoyable, but mostly forgettable Hollywood reboot."[353] RogerEbert.com's Gerardo Valero said the movie "plagiarized" A New Hope and resorted to nostalgia. He felt that it "didn't [justify] a return to the universe" from not having an original story of its own to tell in the plot, characters, and musical score, negatively comparing it to George Lucas' prequel trilogy, and that some of its climactic moments felt unearned.[354] </p>

<p> In an interview with Charlie Rose that aired on December 24, 2015, Lucas likened his decision to sell Lucasfilm to Disney to a "divorce" and outlined the creative differences between him and the producers of The Force Awakens. Lucas described the previous Star Wars films as his "children" and criticized the "retro feel" of The Force Awakens, saying: "I worked very hard to make [my films] completely different, with different planets, with different spaceships—you know, to make it new." Lucas also likened Disney to "white slavers", which drew some criticism; he subsequently apologized.[355][356] In a 2019 memoir, Disney chairman Bob Iger said that Lucas "couldn't even hide his disappointment" towards Abrams' interpretation. According to Iger, Lucas said, "there's nothing new" after seeing the film, and that "there weren't enough visual or technical leaps forward".[357][358] Lucas preferred Rian Johnson's sequel The Last Jedi and the anthology film Rogue One (2016).[359][360] </p>

<p> The Force Awakens premiered in Los Angeles on December 14, 2015, four days before its release in North America and more than ten years after the release of Revenge of the Sith, the last live-action Star Wars film. Critics compared it favourably to the original trilogy, praising its action sequences, characters, acting, special effects, musical score and emotional drama, though some criticized it as derivative. Disney backed the film with an extensive marketing campaign; it has broken many box office records, including the highest-grossing worldwide opening of all time and the fastest film of all time to reach $1 billion. The film broke various box office records and became, unadjusted for inflation, the highest-grossing installment in the franchise, the highest-grossing film in North America, the highest-grossing film of 2015, and the fourth-highest-grossing film of all time, with a worldwide gross of over $2 billion and a net profit of over $780 million. It received five nominations at the 88th Academy Awards and four nominations at the 69th British Academy Film Awards, where it won the award for Best Special Visual Effects. </p>

<p> Resistance pilot Poe Dameron meets village elder Lor San Tekka on the planet Jakku to obtain a map to Luke's location. Stormtroopers under the command of Kylo Ren destroy the village and capture Poe. Poe's droid BB-8 escapes with the map, and encounters a scavenger, Rey, at a junkyard settlement. Ren tortures Poe and learns of BB-8. Stormtrooper FN-2187, refusing to kill for the First Order, frees Poe and they steal a TIE fighter to escape; Poe dubs FN-2187 "Finn". They crash on Jakku, and Finn loses Poe. Assuming that Poe had died in the crash, he travels to the village where encounters Rey and BB-8, but the First Order tracks them and launches an airstrike. The three flee the planet in a stolen, rundown ship, the Millennium Falcon. Rey can manage to pilot the Falcon while Finn takes control of the turrent and they work together to destroy the two pursuing TIE fighters and leave the planet. </p>

<p> With an estimated budget of $200 million ($423 million including marketing, printing and advertising costs, and making and distribution of home videos), The Force Awakens is predicted to be a major box office success. Reports in April 2015 from The Hollywood Reporter and Amboee Brand Intelligence predicted the film would earn up to $540 million worldwide for its opening, breaking the record for the biggest worldwide opening (held by Jurassic World with $524.1 million in June 2015), as well as breaking the record for the biggest U.S. opening (also held by Jurassic World, with $208.8 million). They also believed that The Force Awakens would have the widest release ever, across 4,500 theaters in North America (a record held by The Twilight Saga: Eclipse with 4,468 theaters). Box office analyst Phil Contrino likened the film to Avatar (2009), which opened to $77 million in North America and went on to earn $2.8 billion worldwide, saying The Force Awakens would earn $1 billion "without blinking" and could cross $2 billion. In August 2015, Deadline.com predicted an opening weekend of $615 million worldwide could be possible, including a $300 million opening in North America. In November, Deadline reported opening weekend projections were at $185–210 million. In December, capital analyst Barton Crockett suggested that the film will be the first to gross over $3 billion worldwide at the box office. </p>

<p> Star Wars: The Force Awakens received nearly universal acclaim from both critics and audiences. The only dissenting voices were those who criticized the film's safe plot (with many original trilogy assets reused) and those who criticized the film's pacing.[2] Apart from such considerations, the reception has been highly positive. On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes it has a 93% approval rating, based on 316 reviews, with a rating average of 8.2 out of 10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Packed with action and populated by both familiar faces and fresh blood, The Force Awakens successfully recalls the series' former glory while injecting it with renewed energy.".[3] On Metacritic, the film has a score of 81 out of 100, based on 52 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".[4] On CinemaScore, audiences gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale; women, under-25s and under-18s gave it an "A+", while 98% of audiences gave it an "A" or "B".[5] Caillou Pettis of Caillou Pettis Movie Reviews scored the film an "A+" stating "It was definitely my favorite movie of 2015". </p>

<p> The Force Awakens' first screenplay was written by Michael Arndt.[81] At the time of his hiring, Arndt was also tapped to pen story treatments for the following installments.[82] Arndt took part in a writers room with Simon Kinberg, Lawrence Kasdan, Pablo Hidalgo, and Kiri Hart to discuss and plan the overall trilogy.[83] Early drafts had Luke Skywalker appear midway through the film, but Arndt found that "every time Luke came in and entered the movie, he just took it over. Suddenly you didn't care about your main character anymore."[84] The writers decided to use Luke as the film's MacGuffin and, as something that the protagonists needed to find, would not appear in person until the final scene.[84] Arndt also developed some backstory elements for the returning characters from the original trilogy, such as how Leia was instrumental in rebuilding the Republic after the fall of the Empire before being discredited when it was publicly revealed that her biological father was Darth Vader (this would go on to become a central plot point in the canonical novel Star Wars: Bloodline).[85] </p>

<p> Several directors were considered, including David Fincher,[86] Brad Bird,[87] Jon Favreau,[88] and Guillermo del Toro.[89] Bird was reportedly the "top choice" to helm the film, but his commitments to Tomorrowland forced him to withdraw.[90] Matthew Vaughn was an early candidate for the job, even dropping out of X-Men: Days of Future Past in favor for the film.[91] Colin Trevorrow was also under consideration by the studio, while Ben Affleck and Neill Blomkamp passed on the project.[92][93][94][95] After a suggestion by Steven Spielberg to Kennedy,[96] J. J. Abrams was named director in January 2013,[97] with Lawrence Kasdan and Simon Kinberg as project consultants.[98] Kasdan worked to convince Abrams to direct the film after the filmmaker initially rejected the offer.[99][100] Arndt worked on the script for eight months, but said he needed 18 more, which was more time than Disney or Abrams could give him.[101] The production announced Arndt's exit from the project on October 24, 2013. That same day, Kasdan and Abrams took over script duties,[102] both of whom planned the story while walking in Santa Monica, California, New York City, Paris, and London. The first draft was completed in six weeks.[103] Abrams said the key to the film was that it return to the roots of the first Star Wars films and be based more on emotion than explanation.[104] In January 2014, Abrams confirmed that the script was complete.[105] In April 2014, Lucasfilm clarified that Episodes VII–IX would not feature storylines from the Star Wars expanded universe, though other elements could be included, as with the TV series Star Wars Rebels.[106] </p>

<p> In November 2015, Lucas recorded an hour-long interview with CBS News reporter Charlie Rose in which he said Disney had not been "keen" to involve him and conceded: "If I get in there, I'm just going to cause trouble because they're not going to do what I want them to do, and I don't have the control to do that any more, and all it would do is just muck everything up."[110] He also said, "They wanted to do a retro movie. I don't like that. Every movie, I worked very hard to make them different [...] I made them completely different—different planets, different spaceships to make it new."[111][112] In early December 2015, Kathleen Kennedy told The Hollywood Reporter that Lucas had seen the movie and "liked it".[113] In the same month, at the Kennedy Center Honors, Lucas stated, "I think the fans are going to love it, It's very much the kind of movie they've been looking for."[114] Abrams felt that, as the first in a new trilogy, the film "needed to take a couple of steps backwards into very familiar terrain" and use plot elements from previous Star Wars films.[115] </p>

<p> Beginning in September 2013, production spaces at the Bad Robot facility were converted for shooting of The Force Awakens for the benefit of shooting a minor portion of the film in the United States.[120] The film's costume designer was Michael Kaplan, who had previously worked with Abrams on the films Star Trek (2009) and Star Trek Into Darkness (2013).[121] Film editors Mary Jo Markey and Maryann Brandon, long-term collaborators with Abrams, were also signed.[122] In August 2013, it was announced that cinematographer Daniel Mindel would be shooting the film on 35 mm film (specifically Kodak 5219).[123] In October 2013, other crew members were confirmed, including sound designer Ben Burtt, director of photography Mindel, production designers Rick Carter and Darren Gilford, costume designer Michael Kaplan, special effects supervisor Chris Corbould, re-recording mixer Gary Rydstrom, supervising sound editor Matthew Wood, visual effects supervisors Roger Guyett, and executive producer Jason McGatlin.[124] </p>

<p> In April, Ridley, Boyega, Isaac, Driver, Serkis, Domhnall Gleeson, and Max von Sydow were announced as part of the cast; while Ford, Hamill, Fisher, Anthony Daniels, Peter Mayhew, and Baker reprised their roles from the original trilogy.[28] In June, cast additions Lupita Nyong'o and Gwendoline Christie were announced.[32] To prepare for his role, Hamill was assigned a personal trainer and a nutritionist at the request of the producers, who wanted him to resemble an older Luke.[157] Fisher was also assigned a personal trainer and a nutritionist.[157] Abrams initially considered using Daniels only in a voice role for C-3PO,[158] but Daniels opted to reprise the role physically as well; the production team built a new C-3PO costume to accommodate him.[159] A flashback scene was cut from Rey's vision (following her discovery of Luke's lightsaber), which would have featured Robert Boulter standing in for Luke as he appeared in his duel with Vader in The Empire Strikes Back.[160] </p>

<p> That same month, Harrison Ford fractured his leg while filming at Pinewood after a hydraulic door on the Millennium Falcon set fell on him, and was taken to a hospital. According to Abrams, Ford's ankle "went to a 90-degree angle".[101] Production was suspended for two weeks because of Ford's injury.[174] Ford's son Ben said the ankle would likely need a plate and screws and that filming could be altered slightly, with the crew needing to shoot Ford from the waist up for a short time until he recovered.[175] A month later, Jake Steinfeld, Ford's personal trainer, said Ford was recovering rapidly.[176] Abrams also suffered a fractured vertebra in his back when he was trying to help lift the door after Ford's accident,[101] but he kept this to himself for over a month.[177] In February 2016, it was reported that the Health and Safety Executive brought four criminal charges against Disney subsidiary Foodles Production (UK), Ltd. for alleged health and safety breaches relating to Ford's accident.[178] Foodles Production (UK) Ltd was subsequently fined $1.95 million in October 2016 for two health and safety breaches, after admitting the counts at an earlier hearing.[179] </p>

<p> Kennedy said The Force Awakens would use real locations and models over computer-generated imagery.[188] Johnson reiterated that Abrams would use little CGI and more practical, traditional special effects, saying: "I think people are coming back around to [practical effects]. It feels like there is sort of that gravity pulling us back toward it. I think that more and more people are hitting kind of a critical mass in terms of the CG-driven action scene lending itself to a very specific type of action scene, where physics go out the window and it becomes so big so quick."[189] Abrams' intention in prioritizing practical special effects was to recreate the visual realism and authenticity of the original Star Wars.[190] To that end, the droid BB-8 was a physical prop developed by Disney Research,[191] created by special effects artist Neal Scanlan and operated live on set with the actors.[192][193] The Holochess sequence was created using stop-motion, which was supervised by Tippett Studio and overseen by Phil Tippett, who also worked on the stop-motion sequence in the original Star Wars film.[194][195] </p>

<p> Disney backed The Force Awakens with extensive marketing campaigns.[214][215] Deadline Hollywood estimated the media value was $175 million;[216] its costs alongside home media revenues had later risen to $423 million by The Guardian.[217] On November 28, 2014, Lucasfilm released an 88-second teaser trailer. It was screened in selected cinemas across the United States and Canada and in theaters worldwide in December 2014. It was also released on YouTube and the iTunes Store,[218] generating 58.2 million views on YouTube in its first week.[219] Critics compared the brief footage favorably to the production values of the original trilogy. The Hollywood Reporter called the trailer "perfectly potent nostalgia", praising its mix of old and new.[220] Empire was impressed by the continuity with the first films—"the feel of classic Star Wars"—but noted the absence of Hamill, Ford, and Fisher and speculated about the significance of the new characters.[221] The Guardian wrote that the use of the Star Wars fanfare by John Williams reinforced brand loyalty among fans.[222] </p>

<p> On December 11, 2014, Abrams and Kennedy released a series of eight mock Topps trading cards revealing the names of several characters.[223] On April 16, 2015, a second teaser trailer, this one lasting two minutes, was shown at the opening panel at the Star Wars Celebration in Anaheim, California. Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy said the reaction to the trailer was "staggering [...] the entire room of almost eight thousand people just leapt to their feet and roared, I mean I can't think of anything I've ever been to—other than a rock concert—that felt quite like that".[224] The trailer was viewed over 88 million times within the first 24 hours of release.[225] The trailer shows many of the new characters and the first footage of Chewbacca and Han Solo. The Huffington Post's Graham Milne wrote that the trailer "was an affirmation of something that we'd long been told was never going to happen. This was a gift. This was faith rewarded. About damn time."[226] </p>

<p> Vanity Fair was the first magazine to release an exclusive cover issue devoted to The Force Awakens. The magazine, released on May 7, 2015, featured exclusive interviews and photos of the cast photographed by Annie Leibovitz.[227] At the 2015 San Diego Comic-Con, in addition to a panel with many of the actors, a behind-the-scenes look at the film demonstrated the film's use of practical sets and effects. It was positively received, with Nigel M. Smith of The Guardian writing: "The featurette's angle is a strong one and connects with fans of the original trilogy in an incredibly poignant way. It also does a sly job of teasing Fisher's new look as Leia and Simon Pegg's mysterious involvement as a rumored alien in the movie, without actually showing the actors in action." Smith compared the marketing strategy for the film to that of a previous Abrams film, Super 8, saying "the promos [...] are notable for what they tease, not what they give away."[228] </p>

<p> Walt Disney Studios and Lucasfilm presented a look at The Force Awakens at Disney's D23 Expo in August 2015.[229] Drew Struzan—who designed the poster artwork for the previous Star Wars films—produced a commemorative poster given to the event's attendees.[230] In October 2015, Lucasfilm unveiled the theatrical release poster and a third trailer. The poster omitted Luke Skywalker and revealed a Death Star-like "orb".[231] The trailer debuted during the halftime break of Monday Night Football, before being released online.[232] The reaction to the trailer by fans on social media was "frenzied", with Lizo Mzimba of the BBC writing that "perhaps the most significant thing about the final trailer before the film's release is how little of the story it reveals."[233] Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph felt the trailer was "a perfect blend of old and new, in keeping with the old-fashioned Star Wars aesthetic".[234] The trailer received 128 million views in 24 hours. 16 million of the views came from its airing on Monday Night Football.[235] At the end of October, Air France announced a "Flight and Cinema" package, providing customers who book select flights to Paris transportation to a theater to see the film, since France was one of the first countries to release the film.[236] On November 23, a partnership with Google was announced, in which Google users could choose to affiliate themselves with either the Dark or Light Side, which would change the appearance of their Google websites. Additionally, Disney teamed up with Verizon to create a virtual-reality experience for Google Cardboard.[237] </p>

<p> Disney Consumer Products and Lucasfilm announced that September 4, 2015 would be deemed "Force Friday" and would be the official launch of all the merchandise for The Force Awakens. Beginning at 12:01 am, fans could buy toys, books, clothing and various other products at Disney Stores and other retailers throughout the world.[242] Disney and Maker Studios hosted an 18-hour live-streaming presentation on YouTube, showcasing multiple merchandise products beginning on September 3, 2015.[243][244] Among these products were a remote-controlled BB-8 developed by Sphero.[191] Sphero had participated in a Disney-run startup accelerator in July 2014, where they were invited into a private meeting with Disney CEO Bob Iger, in which they were shown on-set photos and imagery of BB-8 before its public unveiling.[245][246] Many retailers, such as Toys "R" Us, were unable to meet demand for Star Wars products due to the event.[247] </p>

<p> In the United States and Canada, it had the widest release of December across 4,134 theaters,[257] of which 3,300 were 3D locations, a record 392 IMAX screens (13 of which were 70mm), 451 premium large format screens, 146 D-Box locations,[258][259] as well as releasing in the Dolby Vision format (high-dynamic range, Rec. 2020 color) in Dolby Cinema.[260] Worldwide, it was released across 940 IMAX theaters, a new record.[259] On December 18, 2015, the film began playing on every IMAX screen in the United States and Canada for four straight weeks up to January 14, 2016. This made it the first film since Warner Bros.' The Hobbit trilogy to receive such a release.[261] The film finally shed some of its IMAX screens with the release of The Revenant (2015) and The Finest Hours (2016) in mid-January 2016.[262] </p>

<p> Advance ticket sales for the film began on October 19, 2015,[263] and were in strong demand, resulting in online movie ticket sites crashing.[264][265] Vue Cinemas, the United Kingdom's third-largest theater chain, sold 45,000 tickets in 24 hours, 10,000 of which were sold in 90 minutes, a record for the theater.[266] In the United States, the film pre-sold a record-breaking $6.5 million worth of IMAX ticket sales on a single day. IMAX has never previously registered more than $1 million in pre-sales on a single day.[267] In total, it sold over $50 million in pre-sales, breaking the record.[268][269] This number was raised to $100 million including $50–60 million in advance ticket sales by December 14.[269][270] However, not all tickets that were pre-sold were for the film's opening weekend, with Fandango President Paul Yanover saying "people have set aside tickets for screenings in January, weeks after the big opening [...] We have people buying Star Wars [The Force Awakens] into 2016. It's not just an opening-weekend phenomenon."[268] Similarly, the film broke pre-sales records in the UK,[271] Canada,[272] and Germany.[273] </p>

<p> Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Star Wars: The Force Awakens through digital download and Disney Movies Anywhere on April 1, 2016, and on Blu-ray and DVD on April 5. Physical copies include behind-the-scenes featurettes, deleted scenes, interviews,[280] and additional footage with eight bonus features.[281] In its first week, The Force Awakens sold 669,318 DVDs and 3.4 million Blu-rays as the most sold film on both formats in the United States.[282] That same week, The Force Awakens topped the Nielsen VideoScan First Alert chart, which tracks overall disc sales, as well as the dedicated Blu-ray sales chart with 83% of unit sales coming from Blu-ray.[283] Overall, The Force Awakens sold 2.1 million DVDs and 5.9 million Blu-rays, adding them up to get a total of 8 million copies, and made $191 million through home media releases.[282] </p>

<p> Star Wars: The Force Awakens grossed $936.7 million in the United States and Canada and $1.132 billion in other countries for a worldwide total of $2.07 billion,[3] making it the highest-grossing film of 2015[289] and the third highest-grossing film of all time.[290] Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold close to 110 million tickets in the United States and Canada.[291] The Force Awakens earned 8.6% of the total 2015 releases in the United States and Canada, second only to the 8.8% of the box office earned by Titanic in 1997.[292] It was the 24th film in cinematic history to gross $1 billion worldwide, standing as the fastest film to surpass the mark at the time, doing so in 12 days.[293] It was also the third film in history to surpass $2 billion worldwide, doing so on its 53rd day of release.[294] Deadline Hollywood calculated the film's net profit as $780.1 million, accounting for production budgets[b], marketing, talent participations, and other costs; box office grosses and home media revenues placed it first on their list of 2015's "Most Valuable Blockbusters".[171] </p>

<p> In the United States and Canada, The Force Awakens was released on December 18, 2015. It made a record-breaking $57 million from Thursday night previews,[c] of which IMAX screenings generated a record-breaking $5.7 million from 391 screens.[304] On its opening day, the film grossed $119.1 million, marking the biggest single- and opening-day record[305] and the first time a film has earned more than $100 million in a single day.[306] Without Thursday-night grosses, the film earned the second-largest opening-day gross[307] and a record of $247.9 million for its opening weekend.[282] The debut was 19% bigger than the previous record holders The Avengers (2012) ($207 million) and Jurassic World (2015) ($208 million).[308] The opening weekend figure included an IMAX opening-weekend record of $30.1 million (12.65%) from 391 IMAX theaters,[309][310] which nearly amounts to the $252.5 million total earned by Return of the Jedi—the second-lowest-grossing film in the series—in its original run.[311] 2D screenings accounted for 53% of the total opening gross while 3D accounted for 47%. RealD 3D comprised $78 million of the opening gross, setting a new record.[309] At that time, the film had the biggest December opening weekend, breaking the previous record held by The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey (2012).[312] It would hold this record until it was surpassed by Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021) six years later.[313] Revenues in the film's second weekend decreased by only 39.8% in the United States and Canada, earning $149.2 million, to remain in first place at the box office[314] and recording the biggest second weekend of all time.[315] </p>

<p> Internationally, the film was released in over 30,000 screens.[324] It opened on December 16, 2015, in 12 international markets and earned $14.1 million on its opening day, debuting at first place in all of them.[325] It expanded in an additional 42 countries on December 17, generating $58.6 million for a two-day international total of $72.7 million, reaching first place in all 44 markets.[326] It grossed a total of $129.5 million in three days after adding $56.8 million on its third day,[326] and set a new midnight record in the United Kingdom with $3.6 million.[327] It broke opening-day records in the United Kingdom ($14.4 million), Germany ($7.1 million), Australia ($6.8 million),[304] Sweden ($1.7 million), Norway ($1.1 million),[325] and in 12 other countries.[327] Other markets which generated large opening days were Spain ($3.5 million) and Japan ($3 million).[326] After the five days, The Force Awakens had a total international opening gross of $281 million from 30,000 screens, a new record for December opening[324][328] and the third-biggest international opening of all time.[329] International markets generating opening-weekend tallies of at least $10 million were the United Kingdom ($50.6 million), Germany ($27.5 million), France ($22.5 million), Australia ($19.6 million), Japan ($13.4 million), and Russia ($12.3 million). The film had the biggest opening of all time in 18 countries including the United Kingdom, Germany, Australia, Russia, and Sweden.[324][330] </p>

<p> After five days, the film had a total worldwide opening record of $529 million from 74 territories, which was the biggest worldwide opening at that time, making it only the second time in cinematic history—after Jurassic World—that a film had opened to more than $500 million globally.[328][331] This included an IMAX opening record of $48 million.[331] Revenues from IMAX dipped slightly, generating $19 million in its second weekend, for a record total of over $70 million in 11 days.[332] IMAX generated $17.9 million from 276 IMAX theaters.[310] The film had a steeper decline in its second weekend, falling 51% to $136.9 million.[333] The film had an unsuccessful opening in India where it opened third against two local blockbusters with a mere $1.51 million.[334] As of February 2016, the highest-grossing markets outside of the United States and Canada were the United Kingdom ($180.7 million), China ($124.5 million), Germany ($109.7 million), Japan ($92.6 million), and France ($88.2 million).[335] On January 17, 2016, it passed the $1 billion mark overseas becoming the first film of Disney, the third film of 2015 and the fifth film overall to achieve this feat.[336] It topped the international box office chart for five consecutive weekends, becoming the first film since Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015) to have five straight wins, before being dethroned by The Revenant in its sixth weekend.[337] In Japan, it topped the box office for six straight weekends.[337] </p>

<p> Star Wars: The Force Awakens received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics.[338] On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 93% of 451 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.3/10. The website's consensus reads, "Packed with action and populated by both familiar faces and fresh blood, The Force Awakens successfully recalls the series' former glory while injecting it with renewed energy".[4] Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 80 out of 100, based on 55 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews.[339] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale; women, and people under the ages of 25 and 18 gave it an "A+", while 98% of audiences gave it either an "A" or a "B". Audiences polled by PostTrak gave the film an 88% "definite recommend" while 96% said it met or exceeded their expectations.[340] </p>

<p> Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph said the film "sets out to shake Star Wars from its slumber, and reconnect the series with its much-pined-for past", and "it achieves this both immediately and joyously is perhaps the single greatest relief of the movie-going year."[341] Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian said that it was "both a narrative progression from the earlier three films and a shrewdly affectionate next-gen reboot", and it was "ridiculous and melodramatic and sentimental, but exciting and brimming with energy and its own kind of generosity."[342] Variety's Justin Chang wrote that the film has "sufficient style, momentum, love, and care to prove irresistible to any who have ever considered themselves fans."[343] Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times described it as "a beautiful, thrilling, joyous, surprising, and heart-thumping adventure".[344] Ann Hornaday, writing for The Washington Post, thought the film had "enough novelty to create yet another cohort of die-hard fans", and the film struck "all the right chords, emotional, and narrative, to feel both familiar and exhilaratingly new."[345] The Charlotte Observer's Lawrence Toppman said Abrams had "pulled off a delicate balancing act, paying clever homage to the past."[346] Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the film his highest rating and called it "the best Star Wars sequel yet and one of the best films of 2015".[347] Frank Pallotta, reviewing the film for CNN Business, found it was the best Star Wars film since the original trilogy and that it "is bound to be a film experience long remembered by fans and non-fans alike".[348] </p>

<p> Tom Long of The Detroit News wrote that though some may find the film too similar to the original Star Wars, it leaves "the ungainly and unneeded clumsiness of the subsequent prequels far behind", and "the energy, humor, and simplicity of direction [has] been recaptured".[349] The Tribune-Star called it "basically the same" as the original film but "isn't that what we all wanted anyway?"[350] Stephanie Zacharek of Time wrote that Abrams had delivered "everything we expect, as opposed to those nebulous wonders we didn't know we wanted".[351] Reviewing for Forbes, Scott Mendelson cited the film's "top-tier production values and a strong sense of scale and scope", but felt it was so much "an exercise in fan service [that] it is only due to the charisma and talent of our newbies and J. J. Abrams' undeniable skill as a visual storyteller that the Mad Libs narrative doesn't outright destroy the picture."[352] Brian Merchant of Motherboard said that the film "is supposed to be all about exploring the unexplored, not rehashing the well-trod", and that "one of the most unabashedly creative enterprises of the 20th century has been rendered another largely enjoyable, but mostly forgettable Hollywood reboot."[353] RogerEbert.com's Gerardo Valero said the movie "plagiarized" A New Hope and resorted to nostalgia. He felt that it "didn't [justify] a return to the universe" from not having an original story of its own to tell in the plot, characters, and musical score, negatively comparing it to George Lucas' prequel trilogy, and that some of its climactic moments felt unearned.[354] </p>

<p> In an interview with Charlie Rose that aired on December 24, 2015, Lucas likened his decision to sell Lucasfilm to Disney to a "divorce" and outlined the creative differences between him and the producers of The Force Awakens. Lucas described the previous Star Wars films as his "children" and criticized the "retro feel" of The Force Awakens, saying: "I worked very hard to make [my films] completely different, with different planets, with different spaceships—you know, to make it new." Lucas also likened Disney to "white slavers", which drew some criticism; he subsequently apologized.[355][356] In a 2019 memoir, Disney chairman Bob Iger said that Lucas "couldn't even hide his disappointment" towards Abrams' interpretation. According to Iger, Lucas said, "there's nothing new" after seeing the film, and that "there weren't enough visual or technical leaps forward".[357][358] Lucas preferred Rian Johnson's sequel The Last Jedi and the anthology film Rogue One (2016).[359][360] </p>

<p> Robert Daniels 812filmreviews The success of The Last Jedi, like its father before it, will most likely rest on the conclusion of the trilogy. Rated: 3/4 Aug 27, 2018 Full Review Kambole Campbell One Room With A View It's the one we've been waiting for. Rated: 5/5 Aug 25, 2018 Full Review Matthew Rozsa Salon.com "Star Wars" is not "Breaking Bad," and the same narrative tricks that worked for the latter feel jarringly out of place in the former. Rated: 2/4 Jul 27, 2018 Full Review Calum Cooper Movies We Texted About The Last Jedi is not just a great Star Wars film – it rivals the daring, innovation and thematic richness of even the original trilogy. Rated: 5/5 Dec 10, 2024 Full Review Joseph Tomastik Loud and Clear Reviews The Last Jedi is not only the best film in the Sequel Trilogy by far, but it’s a very natural, very fitting way to continue the story that started with The Force Awakens. Nov 3, 2024 Full Review Manuel São Bento MSB Reviews Star Wars: The Last Jedi delivers something that I can be proud of experiencing. Rian Johnson takes a lot of risks with decisions that will make the fanbase debate for years and while I find most of them truly jaw-dropping, a few left me underwhelmed. Rated: B+ Jul 24, 2023 Full Review Read all reviews </p>

<p> William This movie was straight up dog water.. Rated 0.5/5 Stars • Rated 0.5 out of 5 stars 04/17/25 Full Review Tom Another missed opportunity. Despite the controversy with long time fans, I actually didn’t mind how they handled the story of a certain legacy character in the franchise. It was the problematic pacing, execution and lack of narrative thrust that actually derailed this one. Rated 1.5/5 Stars • Rated 1.5 out of 5 stars 01/03/25 Full Review Raymond it's an okay movie, disappointed is the exact word. Rated 3/5 Stars • Rated 3 out of 5 stars 07/09/24 Full Review kyayr All over the place as a film. Rated 3/5 Stars • Rated 3 out of 5 stars 05/13/23 Full Review Brendan Revisiting this movie on the big screen 5 years later, it plays so well, better than first blush. This will be considered the second best SW eventually Rated 5/5 Stars • Rated 5 out of 5 stars 01/30/23 Full Review dan what was Disney thinking here Rated 0.5/5 Stars • Rated 0.5 out of 5 stars 10/24/22 Full Review Read all reviews </p>

<p> Best Star Wars Moments Ever Best Star Wars Moments Ever 24:20 Preview: Rotten Tomatoes is Wrong About... Star Wars: The Last Jedi Preview: Rotten Tomatoes is Wrong About... Star Wars: The Last Jedi 3:06 Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - World of White and Red Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - World of White and Red 1:42 Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - Peace and Purpose Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - Peace and Purpose 1:18 Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - Resistance Bomber Design Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - Resistance Bomber Design 1:08 Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - The New Walker Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - The New Walker 1:23 Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - Luke's Internal Struggle Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - Luke's Internal Struggle 1:16 Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - Carrie Fisher & Rian Johnson Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - Carrie Fisher & Rian Johnson 1:15 Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - Kylo's Choice Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - Kylo's Choice 1:06 Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - The Director and the Jedi Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Behind the Scenes - The Director and the Jedi 1:12 View more videos </p>

<p> Back on Ahch-To, Luke reconnects to the Force, managing to sense a still-recovering Leia. Rey and Kylo have another Force connection, while he is shirtless in his private quarters, which initially makes her uncomfortable and she asks him to cover himself. Kylo sees Rey's weakness of not accepting the fact that her parents left her on Jakku, and always looking for parental figures in Han and now in Luke. Kylo then tells Rey what happened between him and Luke that caused him to choose the dark side, saying that Luke sensed Ben's growing power, feared it, and attempted to kill him, before revealing his reason of killing his father: "Let the past die. Kill it if you have to. That's the only way to become what you were meant to be." Rey refuses to believe in Kylo's story, but instigated by his words, she attempts to find answers about her parents through the dark pit shown in her vision, ending up going through a mirror cave in the process. Inside the cave, she asks to see her parents, but finds no answers as she sees only her own reflection, leaving her desolated. </p>

<p> During another Force connection, Rey is inside a hut, crying and telling Kylo what happened in the mirror cave. A tearful Kylo tries to comfort her by saying that she is not alone, and they warm up to each other as romantic feelings grow between them. Kylo removes his glove and they reach to touch hands through their bond and see visions of them as future partners. But then Luke walks in and when he sees Kylo and Rey touching hands, he becomes furious and destroys the hut. An infuriated Rey confronts Luke over what Kylo told her, and after a brief duel with each other, Luke confesses that he momentarily contemplated killing Kylo upon sensing that Snoke was corrupting him, but hesitated, then Ben woke up to see Luke with his lightsaber. Ben, feeling betrayed, turned to the dark side and became Kylo Ren. Now convinced that Kylo can be redeemed, Rey leaves Ahch-To, declaring that Ben Solo is the last hope to win the war. A disappointed Luke prepares to burn the Jedi library, but hesitates. The Force spirit of Yoda appears before Luke and destroys the library by summoning a bolt of Force lightning, stating that Rey already has what she needs to learn, and encouraging Luke to learn from his failure, stating "The greatest teacher failure is". </p>

<p> Rey and Kylo then work together to battle and defeat Snoke's Praetorian Guards. Rey believes that Kylo has abandoned the dark side, but he still has no intent to help the Resistance, despite his feelings for her. He instead reveals that he intends to create a new order in the galaxy, separate from the legacies created by Luke, Snoke, the Sith, the Jedi, and the Rebels; letting all the past die. He offers his hand, asking Rey to join him and rule the galaxy by his side. He also gets Rey to admit what she had hidden in her mind: her parents were "nobody", Jakku junk traders who sold Rey for drinking money and are long dead, and states that she means something to him despite her origins and appearing to have no place in the grand story. Rey cries hearing his offer, asking him not to follow this path, but Kylo just holds out his hand again and pleads her to take it. Rey hesitates, but ultimately refuses to join Kylo; they battle for control of the Skywalker's lightsaber, ultimately splitting it in two. </p>

<p> The remaining Resistance survivors, joined by Finn, Rose, and BB-8, arrive on Crait to attempt to call for help from the galaxy. The First Order arrives, carrying a superlaser siege cannon and an army of AT-M6s and AT-ATs. Poe, Finn, Rose, and other pilots engage the First Order armies in battle with old speeders, while Rey and Chewbacca arrive on the Falcon and successfully draw the TIE fighters away from the battle. The battle quickly turns in the First Order's favor, and Poe quickly realizes this is a battle they cannot win, but Finn, not wanting to let the First Order win, attempts to perform a suicide run to destroy the cannon, but Rose stops him, injuring herself in the process. Finn runs to help Rose and asks her why she stopped him, and Rose confesses her feelings for him by stating that she was trying to save what she loves, before kissing him on the lips and falling unconscious. The First Order penetrates the Resistance fortress using the cannon, and with no response given for anyone in the galaxy to help the Resistance, Leia believes that the Resistance has failed and the galaxy has lost its spark for good. </p>

<p> In September 2015, Disney shortlisted the female cast members to Gina Rodriguez, Tatiana Maslany, and Olivia Cooke.[37] That same month, Benicio del Toro confirmed his involvement in the film, but denied that he was playing a villain,[38][39] and Mark Hamill was also confirmed.[6] Joaquin Phoenix was also courted to portray the role of DJ, but would end up passing on the offer.[40] In October 2015, Gugu Mbatha-Raw was rumored to have been cast in the film.[41] In November, Kennedy announced at the London premiere of The Force Awakens that the entire cast would return for Episode VIII, along with "a handful" of new cast members.[7] In February 2016, at the start of filming, it was confirmed that Laura Dern and Kelly Marie Tran had been cast in undisclosed roles.[15] In April 2017, at the Star Wars Celebration Orlando, Lucasfilm announced that Tran would play Resistance maintenance worker Rose Tico, which Johnson described as the film's largest new role.[12][13] To keep Frank Oz's return as Yoda a secret, producers excluded Oz's name in the billing for the film's pre-release marketing and ensured that Oz stayed on set during filming.[16] </p>

<p> In January 2016, production of Episode VIII was delayed until February due to script rewrites.[46] Filming was in danger of being delayed further due to an upcoming strike between the Producers Alliance for Cinema and Television and the Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union.[47] On February 10, 2016, Disney CEO Bob Iger confirmed that principal photography had begun[48] under the working title Space Bear.[33] Additional filming took place in Dubrovnik, Croatia from March 9 to 16,[49][50] as well as in Ireland in May.[51] Malin Head in County Donegal and a mountain headland, Ceann Sibeal in County Kerry, served as additional filming locations.[52] To increase the scenes' intimacy Driver and Ridley were both present when filming Kylo and Rey's Force visions.[53] Location filming for the battle scenes on the planet Crait took place at the Salar de Uyuni salt flats in Bolivia.[54] Additional filming took place in Mexico.[55] </p>

<p> Star Wars: The Last Jedi grossed $620.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $712.5 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1.333 billion.[3] It was the highest-grossing film of 2017 and the ninth-highest-grossing film of all time.[82][83] The film had a worldwide opening of $450.8 million, the eighth-biggest of all time, including $40.6 million that was attributed to IMAX screenings, the second biggest for IMAX.[84][85] It was estimated that the film would need to gross $800 million worldwide to break even;[86] On December 31, 2017, the film crossed the $1 billion mark,[87] making it the third Star Wars film to do so. Deadline Hollywood calculated the film's net profit as $417.5 million, accounting for production budgets, marketing, talent participations, and other costs; box office grosses and home media revenues placed it first on their list of 2017's "Most Valuable Blockbusters".[88] </p>

<p> Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com gave the film four stars out of four, praising the surprises and risks that it took, writing that "The movie works equally well as an earnest adventure full of passionate heroes and villains and a meditation on sequels and franchise properties", in which the film "includes multiple debates over whether one should replicate or reject the stories and symbols of the past."[108] Writing for Rolling Stone, Peter Travers gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, praising Johnson's direction and the cast performances, particularly Hamill's, and concluding that the film "ranks with the very best Star Wars epics (even the pinnacle that is The Empire Strikes Back)".[109] Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, praising the action sequences and humor, and said that the film "doesn't pack quite the same emotional punch [as The Force Awakens] and it lags a bit in the second half, [but] this is still a worthy chapter in the Star Wars franchise", containing a few callbacks of "previous characters and iconic moments".[110] </p>

<p> Elsewhere in the galaxy, even though the Resistance is in quite the pickle, its members can’t decide on the best course of action to combat the First Order. Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) is still the hotshot pilot you remember, but his brashness soon gets him into hot water with the leadership, General Organa (Carrie Fisher) and Vice Admiral Holdo (Laura Dern). Meanwhile, Finn (John Boyega) and Resistance maintenance worker Rose (Kelly Marie Tran) have their own plan to save the day which takes them to the casino city of Canto Bight, where people and aliens of all shapes and sizes live in excess. This new locale is overflowing with weird and wondrous alien designs, like a Mos Eisley cantina for the galaxy’s one-percenters, and it serves to demonstrate a different kind of evil than the militaristic First Order while also showing the disenfranchised people worth fighting a star war for. That’s also where we meet Benicio del Toro’s unscrupulous hacker character, DJ, who, with his small but effective part, makes a slimy yet profound impression by sharing a morally gray worldview that isn’t usually expressed in the black-and-white world of Star Wars. </p>

<p> Elsewhere in the galaxy, even though the Resistance is in quite the pickle, its members can’t decide on the best course of action to combat the First Order. Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) is still the hotshot pilot you remember, but his brashness soon gets him into hot water with the leadership, General Organa (Carrie Fisher) and Vice Admiral Holdo (Laura Dern). Meanwhile, Finn (John Boyega) and Resistance maintenance worker Rose (Kelly Marie Tran) have their own plan to save the day which takes them to the casino city of Canto Bight, where people and aliens of all shapes and sizes live in excess. This new locale is overflowing with weird and wondrous alien designs, like a Mos Eisley cantina for the galaxy’s one-percenters, and it serves to demonstrate a different kind of evil than the militaristic First Order while also showing the disenfranchised people worth fighting a star war for. That’s also where we meet Benicio del Toro’s unscrupulous hacker character, DJ, who, with his small but effective part, makes a slimy yet profound impression by sharing a morally gray worldview that isn’t usually expressed in the black-and-white world of Star Wars. </p>

<p> One year after the Battle of Crait, the war between the Resistance and the First Order has continued across the galaxy. Kylo Ren, the Supreme Leader of the First Order, obtains a Sith wayfinder on the planet Mustafar, in which he slaughters an entire group of Sith cultists to get the artifact. The device leads him to planet Exegol, in which he finds an undead clone body of Emperor Palpatine, who reveals that he has brought himself back to life after his death at the hands of Darth Vader, thanks to his powers of the dark side of the Force. Palpatine also reveals that he is the creator of Snoke, which founded the First Order and lured Kylo to the dark side. Palpatine offers Kylo the Final Order, a massive armada of Xyston-class Star Destroyers built by the Sith Eternal, and Kylo the opportunity for him to become the ruler of a new Sith Empire to take ultimate control of the galaxy in exchange of him finding and killing Rey, whom the Sith Lord states is "not who you think she is". </p>

<p> At the Resistance base, Rey continues her Jedi training under Leia Organa's guidance, though she struggles with using the Force to hear the Jedi of the past. Finn, Chewbacca, Poe Dameron, R2-D2, and Klaud retrieve information on Kylo's discovery originating from a First Order spy and gets pursued by several squadrons of TIE/sf fighters and TIE whisper fighters. After learning that Emperor Palpatine has returned and is hiding on Exegol, Rey discovers Luke Skywalker's notes on a Sith artifact in the Jedi texts that she took from the tree library on Ahch-To. Rey, Finn, Poe, Chewbacca, BB-8, and C-3PO leave for Passanna to seek a contact Luke knew, while R2-D2 and Rose Tico stay with Leia and the Resistance. Meanwhile, Kylo Ren holds a meeting with members of the First Order Supreme Council, including General Hux and Allegiant General Enric Pryde, and they discuss their latest plans, along with Palpatine's resurrection and the fact that there's a hidden spy in the First Order. </p>

<p> Upon saving Chewbacca, Finn and Poe are captured by stormtroopers, but are unexpectedly helped to escape by General Hux, who reveals that he is the spy, but only with the intention to undermine Kylo Ren and see him lose out of spite, not to help the Resistance. Kylo confronts Rey in person and reveals the ultimate truth: that she is Palpatine's granddaughter, the Sith Lord had ordered her death as a child, fearing her power, but her parents placed Rey on Jakku to keep her safe, before the assassin killed her parents. Kylo also tells her that their Force connection is actually a Force dyad, where two Force-sensitive people share a strong bond with each other and are one in the Force. He holds out his hand and asks Rey to join him again to kill the Emperor and take his throne together. But Rey refuses again and escapes with the group on the Falcon. Allegiant General Pryde discovers Hux's treason, executes him and orders a First Order officer to inform Kylo that they found their spy. </p>

<p> Kylo, having tracked the group to Kef Bir, destroys Palpatine's wayfinder, and a final lightsaber duel between Rey and Kylo ensues through the Death Star ruins in the middle of raging waters. Kylo dominates their fight, until Leia uses the Force to call to Kylo, dying in the process. Kylo is distracted upon sensing his mother's death, and Rey quickly gets back up and impales him. In this moment, Rey also senses Leia's death, which allows her to let go of the hatred she was losing herself into and realize what she had just done. She uses the Force to heal Kylo, and confesses her romantic feelings for him by admitting that she wanted to take Ben Solo's hand during their confrontation in Snoke's throne room. Then, she leaves the planet on Kylo's TIE whisper. Kylo soon converses with a vision of his father, Han Solo, and eventually makes the decision to throw away his lightsaber, reclaiming his identity as Ben Solo and turning back to the light side. Meanwhile, Pryde pledges himself to the Sith Lord, who ordered him to send a Sith Star Destroyer, the Derriphan, to destroy Kijimi as a show of force. </p>

<p> A weakened Rey suddenly hears the voices of past Jedi, including Luke, Yoda, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Ahsoka Tano, Anakin Skywalker, Qui-Gon Jinn, Mace Windu, Kanan Jarrus, and others, all of whom lend their power into her. She rises against the Emperor, who attacks her with lightning in a final attempt to kill her, but Rey uses the two Skywalker lightsabers to deflect it back at him, and completely destroys his body, finally ending the reign of the Sith Emperor forever. At the same time, the Resistance wins the battle and destroys the remaining Sith forces, killing Pryde in the process. After finally killing Palpatine, Rey dies from the sheer power shortly after. A heavily injured Ben climbs back up the abyss and crawls towards Rey's lifeless body, gathering her into his arms and hugging her. Shaken by her death, he decides to sacrifice himself in order to resurrect her. He puts a hand on Rey's abdomen and uses Force healing to transfer his own life-force to her. Rey then wakes up, and covers his hand with hers. She smiles upon seeing Ben and calls him by his name. The two smile at each other before finally giving in to their romantic feelings by sharing a passionate kiss. Still in her arms, Ben vanishes into the Force while holding Rey's hand. </p>

<p> Rey transmits her coordinates to R2-D2, allowing the Resistance, now led by Poe and Finn, to follow her to Exegol. There, she confronts Palpatine. Debilitated, he demands that she kill him in anger so his spirit can possess her body. The Resistance attacks the Sith fleet, while Ben overpowers the Knights of Ren and joins Rey. Palpatine senses their power as "a dyad in the Force" and drains it to rejuvenate his body. Lando arrives with reinforcements from across the galaxy, including Babu and Zorii. Palpatine incapacitates Ben and attacks the Resistance fleet with Force lightning. Weakened, Rey hears the voices of past Jedi, who give her strength. Palpatine attacks her with lightning, but Rey deflects it using Luke and Leia's lightsabers, destroying him before dying herself. Ben uses the Force to revive Rey, sacrificing himself, and they kiss before he dies. The Resistance destroys the remaining Sith forces, while people across the galaxy rise up against the First Order. </p>

<p> In late April 2017, Disney announced that the film would be released on May 24, 2019.[62] A month later, filming was expected to begin in January 2018.[63] In August 2017, it was announced that Jack Thorne would rewrite the script.[64] On September 5, 2017, Lucasfilm stated that Trevorrow had left the production following creative differences.[65] Trevorrow's place as director was supposedly on ice since June 2017.[66] The Hollywood Reporter reported that his working relationship with Kathleen Kennedy had become unmanageable after failing to deliver a satisfactory script, despite writing several drafts, nor were either happy with Thorne's revisions.[67][68] Johnson was rumored as the top choice to replace Trevorrow as director,[69] but stated "it was never in the plan for me to direct Episode IX."[70] David Fincher had discussions with the studio but would ultimately decline from directing the film.[71][72] </p>

<p> Carrie Fisher, who played General Leia Organa, died on December 27, 2016.[88] Variety and Reuters reported that she had been planned for a key role in Episode IX.[89] In January 2017, Lucasfilm stated that there were no plans to digitally generate Fisher's performance as they had for Rogue One (2016).[90] The following April, Fisher's brother Todd revealed that Fisher's daughter, Billie Lourd, had granted Disney the rights to use recent footage of Fisher.[91] However, a week later, Kathleen Kennedy stated that Fisher would not appear in the film.[92][93] In July 2018, J. J. Abrams announced that unused footage of Fisher from The Force Awakens would be used to help complete the story.[8][9][94][f] In flashback scenes, digital de-aging was used for the appearance of Luke and Leia through the use of facial shots of both characters from the Empire Strikes Back, and Return of the Jedi respectively.[95] In November 2019, prior to the release of the film, Carrie Fisher's brother Todd Fisher, who planned before her death for her character to appear in the film, revealed that "she was going to be the big payoff in the final film" and "she was going to be the last Jedi, so to speak."[96] </p>

<p> In July 2018, Keri Russell was in talks to play a part with some "action-heavy fight scenes",[98] and it was confirmed that Billy Dee Williams would return as Lando Calrissian,[99] onscreen for the first time since 1983's Return of the Jedi — marking one of the longest intervals between portrayals of a character by the same actor in American film history.[97][g] At the end of July, Russell was confirmed to have been cast,[100] and there was an announcement of returning and additional new cast members.[5] In late August, Deadline Hollywood announced that Dominic Monaghan and Matt Smith had been cast in unspecified roles;[101][102] in 2019, Smith denied his involvement,[103][h] but he later clarified that he had been in talks for an unrealized "transformative" part.[106] Early rumors from Making Star Wars claimed Smith was set to portray a "dark side acolyte" who gets possessed by Palpatine.[107][108] Greg Grunberg reprises his role as Temmin "Snap" Wexley.[31] </p>

<p> Principal photography began on August 1, 2018, at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England.[5] Filming also took place in Wadi Rum, Jordan.[112] Oscar Isaac stated that Abrams was allowing more improvised acting than in the previous two films.[113] Due to the tight schedule, some editing took place on set.[114] The crew on The Rise of Skywalker had three fewer months than they had to work on The Force Awakens leading to Maryann Brandon being sent in to cut on set a third of the way through production.[115] Scenes detailing Palpatine's return were altered and changed during production as they were felt to "go off topic".[116] The kiss between Rey and Ben was initially going to be excluded from the film, until Abrams decided against it at the last minute.[117] Principal photography wrapped on February 15, 2019.[118] Footage from the film was shown at The Walt Disney Company's annual shareholders meeting on March 7, 2019.[119] Two weeks of reshoots took place at Pinewood involving Hamill, Ridley, and Isaac in July 2019.[120] Another round of reshoots took place at Bad Robot between late September and mid-October.[121] Abrams stated that the film had fewer reshoots and story adjustments than Episode VII.[122] </p>

<p> Pre-sale tickets went on sale on October 21, 2019, and the film sold more tickets in their first hour of availability on Atom Tickets than the previous record-holder for ticket sales, Avengers: Endgame (2019). It became Atom Tickets' second-best first-day seller of all time behind Endgame, selling more than twice the number of tickets as The Last Jedi sold in that same timeframe, while Fandango reported it outsold all previous Star Wars films.[163][164] Box office tracking had The Rise of Skywalker grossing around $205 million in its opening weekend, though some firms predicted a debut closer to $175 million.[165] The film made $89.6 million on its first day, including $40 million from Thursday night previews, the sixth-highest opening day of all time.[166][167] It went on to debut to $177.4 million, which was the third-highest opening ever for a December release and the 12th-best of all time, and it was also noted that Saturday (which saw a 47% drop from Friday's gross) was the busiest shopping day of the year, likely affecting ticket sales.[168][169][170] However, Deadline Hollywood did write that "we can't ignore the less than platinum B+" audience exit scores, which could affect the film's legs (box office longevity) moving forward.[168] The film made $32 million on Christmas Day, the second-best total ever for the holiday after The Force Awakens' $49.3 million in 2015.[171] It went on to have a five-day total of $138.8 million, including $76 million for the weekend.[172] In its third weekend the film made $34.5 million, remaining in first,[173][174] before being dethroned in its fourth weekend by newcomer 1917 (2019).[175] On January 14, 2020, the film crossed the $1 billion mark at the box office, becoming Disney's seventh film of 2019 to do so.[176] At the end of its box office run, it was third highest-grossing film of 2019 in this region behind Avengers: Endgame and The Lion King.[177] </p>

<p> Scott Mendelson for Forbes described the film as "possibly worse" compared to the previous Skywalker saga films while ending the main saga and "denying this new trilogy its artistic reason for existence". He also criticized the film for retconning The Last Jedi and for its conventional plot twists, writing that the film is full of "patronizing reversals in the name of mollifying the fans who merely want to be reminded of the first three movies."[189] Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times described the film as "a Last Jedi corrective", which is "the more accurate way to describe it" and represents "an epic failure of nerve". He further wrote it "feels more like a retreat, a return to a zone of emotional and thematic safety from a filmmaker with a gift for packaging nostalgia as subversion."[190] Writing for The New Yorker, Richard Brody wrote that the film's faults "are those of the franchise over all", as the film's director "J. J. Abrams is mainly a distiller and a magnifier and brings virtually no originality to it". Brody said that it would have been better if a "boldly imaginative vulgarian such as Michael Bay" had instead created a "derisive wreckage" of Star Wars.[191] Brian Tallerico of RogerEbert.com criticized the film, giving it 2.5/4 stars, faulting it for "Terrible dialogue, disinterested performances, and an unconvincing, phony CGI aesthetic", and criticizing it for its "misdirection" and calling it "A movie that so desperately wants to please a fractured fanbase that it doesn't bother with an identity of its own", though he praised it for its "[r]emarkable set pieces".[192] </p>

<p> Jodie Comer and Billy Howle briefly appear as Rey's parents, while Tom Wilton and screenwriter Chris Terrio briefly appear as the performer and voice for Aftab Ackbar, the son of Admiral Ackbar, respectively; and Mike Quinn and Kipsang Rotich return as the performer and voice of Nien Nunb, respectively. Denis Lawson and Warwick Davis briefly reprise their roles as Wedge Antilles, a veteran of the Rebel Alliance; and Wicket W. Warrick, now the leader of the Ewoks, respectively. Composer John Williams cameos as Oma Tres, a Kijimi bartender, Kevin Smith cameos as a Kijimi inhabitant, and Abrams' frequent composer collaborator Michael Giacchino cameos as a Sith Trooper, while Lin-Manuel Miranda and Jeff Garlin both cameo as human and alien Resistance troopers, respectively. Actors making reprisal vocal cameos include: Hayden Christensen and James Earl Jones as Anakin Skywalker / Darth Vader, Andy Serkis as Snoke, and the voices of several past Jedi, including Ewan McGregor and Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi (the latter via digitally altered archive audio), Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano, Freddie Prinze Jr. as Kanan Jarrus, Olivia d'Abo as Luminara Unduli, Frank Oz as Yoda, Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn, Jennifer Hale as Aayla Secura, Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu, and Angelique Perrin as Adi Gallia. Ed Sheeran, Karl Urban, Dhani Harrison, Nigel Godrich, J. D. Dillard, and Dave Hearn all cameo as stormtroopers. </p>

<p> In October 2012, Star Wars creator George Lucas sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company. Disney subsequently announced the Star Wars sequel trilogy. The next month, Lawrence Kasdan and Simon Kinberg entered negotiations to write and produce either Episode VIII or Episode IX. Kinberg, Kasdan, and Michael Arndt worked in a writers room to discuss and map out the trilogy. However, these plans did not come to fruition and instead Kasdan co-wrote Star Wars: The Force Awakens with Kinberg serving as a creative consultant. In June 2014, it was announced that Rian Johnson, writer and director of Star Wars: The Last Jedi, would write a story treatment for Episode IX. However in April 2017, Johnson later denied involvement in writing the film, claiming the information was outdated. In August 2015, Colin Trevorrow was announced as the director of the film; he was to write the script with frequent collaborator Derek Connolly. Trevorrow and Connolly's script, titled Star Wars: Duel of the Fates after the theme of the same name from Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace, included elements which were utilized to some extent in the final film, such as Kylo finding a Sith holocron in Darth Vader's castle on Mustafar, the transference of Force energy, the concept of a superlaser-equipped Star Destroyer, Lando leading a galaxy-wide fleet of spaceships to save the day, and Chewbacca receiving a medal. </p>

<p> The next day, it was announced that J.J. Abrams, the director of Star Wars: The Force Awakens, would return to direct the film, and that the film's release date would be moved to December 20, 2019. The story team met with George Lucas before writing the new script to discuss the nature of the Force. Abrams co-wrote the script with Chris Terrio, though Trevorrow and Connolly retain story credits. The story was rewritten to some extent before filming was completed. Terrio had written off working on larger-scale films at the time and did not socially know Abrams prior to agreeing to co-write the film with him. The film was produced by Abrams' company Bad Robot Productions, Kathleen Kennedy, and Michelle Rejwan. According to Terrio, the film's script had to include certain narrative beats provided by Kennedy and Rejwan, including the redemption of the character Kylo Ren. Abrams had also consulted with Johnson on making a film that both stood on its own but built upon previously established ideas and story elements. Until its official reveal, only Abrams knew the title of the film. </p>

<p> Principal photography began on August 1, 2018, at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England. Filming also took place in Wadi Rum, Jordan. Oscar Isaac stated that Abrams was allowing more improvised acting than in the previous two films. Due to the tight schedule, some editing took place on set. The crew on The Rise of Skywalker had three fewer months than they had to work on The Force Awakens leading to Maryann Brandon being sent in to cut on set a third of the way through production. Scenes detailing Palpatine's return were altered and changed during production as they were felt to "go off topic". The kiss between Rey and Ben was initially going to be excluded from the film, until Abrams decided against it at the last minute. Principal photography wrapped on February 15, 2019. Footage from the film was shown at The Walt Disney Company's annual shareholders meeting on March 7, 2019. Two weeks of reshoots took place at Pinewood involving Hamill, Ridley, and Isaac in July 2019. Another round of reshoots took place at Bad Robot Productions between late September and mid-October. Abrams stated that the film had fewer reshoots and story adjustments than Episode VII. </p>

<p> The Skywalker Saga begins – not with a bang but with, er, trade negotiations. Yippee! The first chapter in George Lucas’ prequel trilogy is both the story of Jake Lloyd’s young Anakin Skywalker (fated to become Darth Vader) being rescued from servitude by Jedi duo Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) and Obi-Wan Kenobi (hello there, Ewan McGregor), and a look at how the Empire’s eventual rise began with political meddling and Sith-flavoured subterfuge in the highest halls of power. Spoiler: the ‘Phantom Menace’ is Senator Sheev Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid), aka Darth Sidious, the man who’ll later become the Emperor, pulling the strings on a manufactured dispute to destabilise the Republic. More likely, you’ll remember the podrace set-piece, the astonishing ‘Duel Of The Fates’ lightsaber battle as Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan face off against Palpatine’s apprentice Darth Maul (resulting in Qui-Gon’s noble end, and Maul being sliced in two), and the slapstick antics of one Jar Jar Binks. </p>

<p> The middle film in the prequel trilogy leaps forward a decade after The Phantom Menace – Anakin Skywalker is now not only Hayden Christensen-shaped, but a hater of sand, a beginner at flirting, and a fully-fledged Padawan apprentice to Obi-Wan Kenobi (still McGregor). Attack Of The Clones is both a romance, and a conspiracy thriller: while Anakin pursues a secret love affair with Naboo royalty Padmé Amidala (let’s gloss over the fact that she met him when he was a small child in Phantom), Obi-Wan is on a trail to find the truth behind an assassination attempt on Padmé’s life. That path leads him to discover that a clone army is being created, ordered by a long-dead Jedi, supposedly intended to help the Republic. So far, so suspicious. After tussling with clone DNA source (and bounty hunter) Jango Fett (Temuera Morrison), Obi-Wan eventually learns that Count Dooku (Christopher Lee) was behind the murder plot, and is Darth Sidious’ latest apprentice. Anakin secretly marries Padmé, and prepares to fight alongside Obi-Wan in… </p>

<p> While Yoda declared, “Begun, the Clone War has” at the end of Attack Of The Clones, the conflict was never depicted in the movies. Enter The Clone Wars, a theatrically-released animated 2008 film (directed by Dave Filoni, no less) that kicked off a seven-season cartoon series, exploring what Anakin, Obi-Wan, Yoda, and Padmé got up to while fighting alongside the clone army, against Count Dooku’s Separatists. Told across 133 episodes, comprising various story arcs, presented in non-chronological order, with a vast amount of expanded lore – from Mandalorians to Sith holocrons, with entire new planets and races introduced – The Clone Wars is almost a whole galaxy unto itself. Most importantly, it introduces Ahsoka Tano (Ashley Eckstein), a Jedi Padawan to Anakin Skywalker who eventually decides to leave the Jedi Order after feeling betrayed by them when framed for murder. And the final few episodes of The Clone Wars’ final season take place concurrently with… </p>

<p> The final chapter of the prequel trilogy sees Anakin Skywalker finally become Darth Vader – turned to the Dark Side under the influence of Palpatine, who’s eventually revealed as the mastermind behind the collapse of the Republic. Padmé is pregnant, and Anakin is suffering nightmare visions of her dying in childbirth. Having already lost his mother during Attack Of The Clones, Anakin vows to save Padmé – and is told by Palpatine that only the powers of the Dark Side can allow that to happen. The real sting in Palpatine’s plan to kick-start the Galactic Empire is executing Order 66 – a genetically-encoded decree to the clone army to turn against their Jedi allies and slaughter them all, wiping out near every Jedi in the galaxy. A Dark Side-leaning Anakin battles Obi-Wan on the lava-strewn planet of Mustafar – where Obi-Wan eventually gets the high ground, and Anakin loses limbs and falls into the fire. As Anakin is encased in his life-saving Darth Vader armour, Padmé dies giving birth… to twins! She names them Luke and Leia, and Obi-Wan places them in separate care – Leia with Senator Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits) on Alderaan, Luke with Uncle Owen (Joel Edgerton) and Aunt Beru (Bonnie Piesse) on Tatooine – to protect their lives. </p>

<p> The Jedi games are the most story-driven Star Wars video games in recent memory, and are designed as official canon. They put players in the hardy leather boots of Cal Kestis (Cameron Monaghan) – a Jedi who survived Order 66 (but whose master, Jaro Tapal, did not). Five years after the noble knights were slaughtered en masse, Cal finds himself forced out of hiding and chased down by the Inquisitors – Vader’s personal hit-squad of Jedi-hunters (themselves former Jedi, turned to the Dark Side), first introduced in Star Wars Rebels; keep reading for more on that. Along with chirpy droid BD-1, Jedi-turned-mercenary Cere, grouchy alien Greez, and spooky Nightsister Merrin, Cal traverses the galaxy in the Stinger Mantis ship, pushing countless Stormtroopers off cliffs and avoiding being bisected by Inquisitors along the way. His journey takes him to Darth Maul’s home of Dathomir, Wookiee planet Kashyyyk, and the Fortress Inquisitorius (the Inquisitors’ sleek Apple-gone-goth base), facing off against the likes of the Ninth Sister, the Second Sister – and, eventually, Vader himself. </p>

<p> Ever wondered what legendary smuggler Han Solo got up to a decade before swaggering into A New Hope? Probably not – but Solo fills in the blanks, with Alden Ehrenreich playing the younger version of Harrison Ford’s original trilogy hero. It begins with a prologue in 13 BBY, as Han evades capture from a local gang on Corellia – unlike his lucky pal Qi’ra (Emilia Clarke), who’s captured – and signs up to become an Imperial pilot. Cut to three years later, and Han deserts an Imperial battle and is swept up in a mission to swipe valuable fuel for dangerous gangster Dryden Vos (Paul Bettany), who’s since added Qi’ra to his ranks. Along the way we discover the origin of the surname ‘Solo’, see Han’s first meeting with Chewbacca (Joonas Suotamo), witness the legendary Kessel Run, and watch Han win the Millennium Falcon from Lando Calrissian (Donald Glover). Plus, there’s a greater exploration of the galaxy’s criminal underworld, and a cameo from Darth Maul – having survived his ‘death’ in The Phantom Menace, as revealed in The Clone Wars. For now, that tease is yet to be capitalised upon in live-action. </p>

<p> A decade after Revenge Of The Sith, Obi-Wan Kenobi (McGregor, again) is not in a good place – physically or emotionally. In a literal sense, he’s carving out a simple life as ‘Ben’, hiding out off the radar in a Tatooine cave. Spiritually, he’s racked with PTSD and guilt over losing his former Padawan to the Dark Side, and losing his entire Jedi Order to Order 66, and losing Padmé, and losing his old master Qui-Gon Jinn, and… well, he’s lost a lot. While he’s keeping an eye over young Luke Skywalker from a distance, his mission in Obi-Wan Kenobi is to rescue young Leia (Vivien Lyra Blair) – kidnapped by bounty hunters, drawing Obi-Wan out into the path of Vader’s Jedi-hunting Inquisitor squad. The headline event is two lightsaber-clashing rematches between Obi-Wan and Vader, carefully skirting the edges of canon to set up their final duel in A New Hope – and elsewhere, there’s an Attack Of The Clones flashback for Obi-Wan and Anakin, a fascist moleman, and a live-action trip to the Fortress Inquisitorius. </p>

<p> As its name implies, animated series Rebels is set against the backdrop of the rising Rebellion, in the run-up to the events of A New Hope. But primarily, its central character is Force-sensitive youngster Ezra Bridger (Taylor Gray), a canny thief from the planet Lothal, who is swept up into the crew of the Ghost: Twi’lek pilot Hera Syndulla (Vanessa Marshall), beefy Lasat warrior Zeb Orrelios (Steve Blum), paint-spraying Mandalorian Sabine Wren (Tiya Sircar), cantankerous droid Chopper and Jedi Knight Kanan Jarrus (Freddie Prinze Jr.). As Ezra trains under Kanan, the Ghost crew’s anti-Imperial efforts become part of the wider Rebellion – coming into contact with Ahsoka Tano, Mon Mothma, Princess Leia, Lando Calrissian and more as they face danger from Vader, the Inquisitors, Darth Maul, and eventually Grand Admiral Thrawn. In the finale – SPOILER WARNING – Ezra makes a desperate bid to free Lothal from Imperial rule, blasting himself and Thrawn to who-knows-where with the help of hysperspace-travelling creatures the Purrgil. </p>

<p> The Rogue One prequel series is almost a live-action, adult-oriented companion piece to Rebels – set roughly across the same time period, and exploring the history of Rebel fighter Cassian Andor (Diego Luna) as he’s drawn further into the cause. While it’s Andor’s name in the title, it’s really an ensemble show exploring the key figures in the fightback – from Genevieve O’Reilly’s Mon Mothma, plotting against the Empire while working in the Senate, to Stellan Skarsgård’s Luthen Rael, co-ordinating disparate rebel efforts into an organised network. Plus, we see the story from the Empire’s side too, with Denise Gough’s terrifying Dedra Meero working her way through the ranks, while the snivelling Syril Karn (Kyle Soller) pines for her approval. Season 1 is set across one year – 5 BBY – and offers chilling visions of the prison-industrial complex (Andor is held captive and forced to build Death Star parts), explorations of widespread dissent (the Ferrix funeral uprising), and a real sense of what Imperial rule means (the occupation of Aldhani). Season 2 will leap forward a year every three episodes, covering 4-0 BBY, and leading directly into… </p>

<p> In the opening text crawl of A New Hope, we’re told that “Rebel spies managed to steal secret plans to the Empire’s ultimate weapon, the DEATH STAR” – information that turns the tide of the entire war. Rogue One is the story of how – and by whom – those plans were stolen. The answer is, by a ragtag group of scrappy oddballs on a suicide mission. Leading the story is Jyn Erso (Felicity Jones), raised by Rebel extremist Saw Gerrera (Forest Whitaker) after her father Galen Erso (Mads Mikkelsen) was forcibly recruited by the Empire to build the Death Star. Primarily looking to reunite with her dear old dad, she’s swept up into the cause by Cassian Andor – working with sarcastic, gangly droid K-2SO (Alan Tudyk), blind monk Chirrut Îmwe (Donnie Yen), burly brawler Baze Malbus (Jiang Wen), and defecting Imperial pilot Bodhi Rook (Riz Ahmed) to pilfer the schematics from tropical planet Scarif. They succeed – but none make it out alive. Plus, Vader pops up in his lightsaber-swinging pomp, Grand Moff Tarkin appears via a CGI Peter Cushing, and it closes on a de-aged Leia speaking the all-important word: “Hope.” </p>

<p> The film that started it all. Luke Skywalker, now 19 and played by Mark Hamill, is bored of his dry, desert life on Tatooine and pines for a more exciting existence among the stars. And he gets it – taken under the wing of Obi-Wan Kenobi (now Alec Guinness) when he buys droid R2-D2, who just happens to contain those all-important Death Star schematics. With smuggler Han Solo (Harrison Ford), his furry pal Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew) and protocol droid C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) on board, they set out in the Millennium Falcon to rescue no-nonsense Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher) from the clutches of Darth Vader (David Prowse in body, James Earl Jones in soul), before aiding the Rebellion in blowing the Death Star to smithereens. Medals all round (except for you Chewie, sorry big guy). With the Battle Of Yavin won by the Rebels, we’re finally heading into the ‘ABY’ portion of the timeline. </p>

<p> Three years after losing the Death Star, the Empire is not best pleased. And strike back it does – unleashing a ferocious attack on the Rebel base of ice planet Hoth, sending our heroes scattered to the winds. Luke heads off to meet Master Yoda (Frank Oz) on Dagobah after being prompted by a vision of Obi-Wan’s Force ghost. Han, Leia, C-3PO and Chewie flee in the Falcon, pursued by bounty hunter Boba Fett (Jeremy Bulloch) – and when they hole up on Cloud City under the protection of gambler Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams), he betrays them to Darth Vader. It all ends in tragedy: Han is encased in Carbonite to be held captive by gangster Jabba the Hutt; Yoda senses some dangerous Dark Side leanings in Luke, who leaves his training early; Luke battles Vader, loses a hand – and learns that the Sith Lord isn’t his father’s murderer, but his actual father. Bummer. </p>

<p> The original trilogy concludes a year after the events of The Empire Strikes Back. Luke (now with robotic hand), Leia, C-3PO and R2-D2 sneak into Jabba’s palace on Tatooine to rescue Han – and get captured in the process. Before they can be fed to the Sarlacc, the gang fight back – Leia strangles Jabba to death, Han knocks Boba Fett into the Sarlacc’s maw, and Luke swings his shiny new green lightsaber around. From there, the ultimate fight back against the Empire unfolds. Luke returns to Dagobah to reunite with a dying Yoda, who reveals that Leia is his twin sister – and also Force-sensitive. Meanwhile, Han and Leia head to the forest moon of Endor (home to the adorable but deadly Ewoks) where they can lower the shield on the Empire’s second Death Star – seemingly only half-built, but secretly fully operational. With the Ewoks’ help, they lower the defenses; Luke battles Vader once more and brings him back to the light, Anakin’s last act being to chuck the Emperor down the Death Star’s reactor core; Lando, fighting with the Rebellion, takes out the Death Star 2.0. The Empire is defeated! Yub nub! </p>

<p> Five years after the end of the original trilogy, in swaggers The Mandalorian. Din Djarin’s (Pedro Pascal, chiefly) adventures are set in the New Republic era – with the galaxy pulling itself back together after the fall of the Empire, and plenty of criminal opportunities (and die-hard Imperial remnants) awaiting in the Outer Rim. It’s in those shady backwaters that the Beskar-clad bounty hunter is hired by The Client (Werner Herzog) to track down the artist formerly known as Baby Yoda, likely for nefarious ends – until Din takes the child under his wing and goes on the run, avoiding the clutches of evil Moff Gideon (Giancarlo Esposito). Along the way, they encounter a Mudhorn, a Frog Lady, blue macarons, and heroes including Carl Weathers’ Greef Karga. Plus, Ahsoka Tano pops up in Rosario Dawson form to reveal Baby Yoda’s name as Grogu; Boba Fett (Temuera Morrison) shows up as an ally to Mando, having officially escaped the Sarlacc pit; and Luke Skywalker eventually enters to take Grogu and teach him the ways of the Force, with Din removing his Mandalorian helmet (a big no-no) to bid a proper goodbye to his little green boy. Tears all around. </p>

<p> Jumping off the events of The Mandalorian Season 2, Boba Fett heads back to Tatooine with mercenary Fennec Shand (Ming-Na Wen) in tow, bumping Bib Fortuna off Jabba’s former throne, and asserting himself as a local crime lord. Along the way we get flashbacks to his escape from the Sarlacc in Return Of The Jedi, moody visions of his time spent in the desert with the Tusken Raiders, and present-day power tussles with the Hutt Twins and the Pyke Syndicate. Crucially, we also get two major Mandalorian-centric episodes – one depicting Din Djarin’s lonely journeys in the stars without Grogu by his side, and one showing us Grogu’s training under Luke Skywalker (with important visits from both Ahsoka and Din). Ultimately, Grogu (now having unlocked ‘front-flips’ among other Force abilities) chooses to return to his Mando-dad rather than stay with Luke – and the two reunite during a scuffle on Tatooine, in which Mando helps Boba Fett fight back against the Pykes. Oh, and Boba Fett rides a marauding Rancor. It’s a whole thing. </p>

<p> Frankly, the passing of time in the ‘Mando-verse’ isn’t too clear. But according to Jon Favreau, Mando and Grogu were apart for a good while prior to their The Book Of Boba Fett reunion. Either way, by The Mandalorian Season 3, two years have passed since the duo first found each other. Together, they head to the long-bombed-out remnants of Mandalore so that Din Djarin can bathe in the Living Waters and repent for his helmet removal. Along the way, he re-teams with stoic Mandalorian warrior Bo-Katan Kryze (Katee Sackhoff), who wants the mythical one-off Darksaber that Din won from Moff Gideon at the end of Season 2. The trio reunite several Mandalorian factions and, led by the Darksaber-wielding Bo-Katan, eventually reclaim Mandalore together – taking Moff Gideon out in a ball of flame to boot. There’s also a greater exploration of the New Republic – welcoming in supposedly-rehabilitated former Imperials, struggling under mountains of bureaucracy, and facing threat from the secret Shadow Council who plot its demise. By season’s end, Mando has officially adopted Grogu, living it up together in their cosy new Navarro homestead, with all the frogs Grogu can eat. This is the way. </p>

<p> The events of Ahsoka act as a Rebels sequel-of-sorts – and are concurrent with Mando Season 3, delving further into the New Republic era. Investigating rumours of Grand Admiral Thrawn’s (Lars Mikkelsen) return, Ahsoka teams up with Sabine Wren (Natasha Liu Bordizzo) to follow the clues. The wrinkle? In the years since Rebels ended, Ahsoka tried taking on Sabine (a Mandalorian, if you recall) as a Jedi Padawan – which ended less-than-well. The pair try to repair their frosty bond while Hera Syndulla (Mary Elizabeth Winstead) warns the ambivalent New Republic leaders of Thrawn’s impending return, being facilitated by Morgan Elsbeth. Somewhat seismically, it turns out the Purrgil space-whales – SPOILER ALERT! – zapped Thrawn and Ezra Bridger (Eman Esfandi) to an entirely separate galaxy, to which nefarious Jedi-turned-mercenary Baylan Skoll (Ray Stevenson) is hoping to travel, with his apprentice Shin Hati (Ivanna Sakhno) in tow. Come season’s end, Thrawn and Ezra have returned to the main Star Wars galaxy, while Ahsoka, Sabine, and Baylan and Shin are stranded on Peridea in the galaxy far, far away. Oh, and Ahsoka has a vision quest to Force-realm the World Between Worlds where she encounters Clone Wars-era Anakin in live-action. Trauma: resolved! </p>

<p> The sequel era technically begins here. Animated series Resistance starts six months before The Force Awakens, with plucky pilot Kazuda Xiono (Christopher Sean) tasked by Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) to spy on the inhabitants of the Colossus, a sea-bound refuelling platform on watery planet Castilon. Working with mechanics Jarek Yeager (Scott Lawrence), Tam Ryvora (Suzie McGrath), chatty green alien Neeku (Josh Brener), and droid Bucket, Kaz watches for signs of the First Order – which, over the course of Season 1, encroaches more and more on the station with visits from Captain Phasma (Gwendoline Christie) and the gold-plated Commander Pyre (Liam McIntyre). Near the season’s end it syncs up with Force Awakens, showing us General Hux’s speech on Starkiller Base as the new war truly begins. In Season 2, set during and after The Last Jedi, the Colossus (revealed to be more a ship than a station) searches for a new home while evading First Order attacks – including from Tam, sucked in by propaganda to become a TIE Fighter pilot. Tam eventually defects, the Colossus destroys Pyre’s Star Destroyer, and the show concludes prior to the events of The Rise Of Skywalker. </p>

<p> Three decades after the end of Return Of The Jedi, the next era unfolds. As the First Order begins taking over the New Republic, scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley) crosses paths with droid BB-8, who holds information as to the location of the long-lost Luke Skywalker (a returning Mark Hamill) planted on him by Resistance pilot Poe Dameron (Isaac). Rey and BB-8 then encounter defected stormtrooper Finn, formerly FN-2187 (John Boyega), and together escape desert planet Jakku in the Millennium Falcon. From there, Rey meets Han Solo (Ford) and Chewbacca, discovers she’s Force-sensitive, and is accosted by the villainous Kylo Ren (Adam Driver) – revealed as the son of Han and General Leia Organa (Fisher), turned to the Dark Side by Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis). After the First Order destroys New Republic capital Hosnian Prime with its super-sized Death Star dupe Starkiller Base, Finn, Chewie and Han save Rey; Kylo Ren kills Han Solo in cold blood; Poe Dameron blows up Starkiller Base; and Rey heads to Ahch-To to find Luke, where she hands his old lightsaber out towards him… </p>

<p> …and he promptly chucks it over his shoulder. The Last Jedi picks up exactly where The Force Awakens left off – with Rey trying to coax a reluctant Luke out of exile, and the First Order retaliating against the Resistance by, well, blowing up their entire base. As the dregs of the Resistance stay barely one step ahead of the advancing First Order – while rapidly losing fuel – Poe Dameron proposes a mutinous side-mission: dispatching Finn and Rose (Kelly Marie Tran) to Canto Bight to hire a hacker who can stop the First Order tracking our heroes through hyperspace. Their reckless plan fails, as does Rey’s attempt to redeem Kylo Ren, who she’s now inadvertently communing with via the Force. Together, the duo take down Snoke and his Praetorian Guard – but Ren steps up as the new Supreme Leader, and Rey (who is told her long-lost parents were nobodies) is left to escape to Crait, where a handful of Resistance survivors await their doom. Thankfully, Luke – after some nudging from Yoda’s Force Ghost – turns up on Crait for a showdown with Kylo Ren. Or, the image of Luke projected through the Force does – distracting the First Order long enough for the Resistance to escape. The effort kills Luke, who becomes one with the Force amid an Ahch-To sunset – and his brave stand becomes an inspiring new legend that spreads across the galaxy. </p>

<p> One year after The Last Jedi, the Resistance has rebuilt its ranks. Good job, since the First Order has too – its forces bolstered by Sith cultists on the hidden planet of Exegol, where a resurrected Palpatine clone prepares the Final Order. As Rey, Finn, Poe, C-3PO and Chewie venture off to find a Sith Wayfinder that will show them the path to Exegol, Rey and Kylo Ren’s Force connection grows stronger – turns out, they’re a Force Dyad, their powers linked since Kylo Ren is Vader’s grandson, and Rey is – gasp! – Palpatine’s granddaughter (or, the daughter of a failed, benevolent Palpatine clone). On the Death Star 2.0 wreckage, Rey kills Kylo Ren, who’s already being drawn back to the light by Leia, reaching out to him through the Force in her dying moments. Rey revives Ren using the Force, and he returns as Ben Solo. Together, they fight Palpatine on Exegol, while the Resistance – including Lando Calrissian – battles the Final Order’s massive army with the help of people across the galaxy inspired by Luke’s stand on Crait. Rey communes with the entire lineage of the Jedi and destroys Palpatine – and shares a quick kiss with Ben Solo, who promptly dies. Not because of the kiss (we don’t think). Rey buries Luke and Leia’s sabers on Tatooine, before naming herself Rey Skywalker. Peace is restored. Again! Yub nu- wait, wrong trilogy. </p>

<p> Also taking place in 19 BBY, Clone Force 99, a.k.a. The Bad Batch, arrives to assist the Republic in their campaign on Anaxes. Their unorthodox tactics there lead to intel that points them to the source of the Separatists' curious battle strategies on Skako Minor. Once there, the troopers discover one of their own--Echo, a.k.a. CT-1409--has been kept prisoner as a source of intel on clone troop movements. Since it was an unsanctioned mission, the team is on their own except for Anakin Skywalker and Captain Rex's contingent of troopers. They partner with a race of indigenous beings to defeat the droids and escape to safety, with Echo in tow. The rescued trooper aids the Republic in one last battle in the fight for Anaxes. His strategy leads to Anakin killing Admiral Trench while the Bad Batch and other troopers dispatch the droid army. In the end, Echo opts to join the Bad Batch as they embark on yet another mission in the long war. </p>

<p> The Lone Wolf and Cub-type story continues as Mando and Baby Yoda take odd jobs throughout the galaxy, including protecting a small agricultural community with the help of former Rebel Shock Trooper Cara Dune, assisting a young bounty hunter in attempting to bring in a notorious assassin, and an ill-fated mission to liberate a prisoner of the Republic. Mando then recruited allies in Cara and Kuiil--who had rebuilt IG-11 as a service droid--on his return trip to Arvala-7 in a plan to team up with Greef Karga and eliminate the former Imperial Client once and for all. However, Moff Gideon arrived with a sizable force of Imperial troopers and laid waste to the Client's stronghold, killing him. While the Mandalorian, Cara, and Greef are pinned down, Kuiil attempted to take the baby Yoda to safety aboard the Razor Crest, but two scout troopers on speeder bikes shot him and his Blurrg mount dead before scooping up the baby Yoda and returning him to Moff Gideon. </p>

<p> Stopping off in Nevarro for repairs, reuniting with Marshal Cara Dune and Magistrate Greef Karga. The Child is left in the care of a local school and its droid instructor, though cookies are the only thing on Baby Yoda's mind. Along with the Mythrol The Mandalorian captured earlier, the trio sets to destroying the last remaining Imperial base on the planet, hoping to free it from any outside influence. However, they discover Imperial scientists hurriedly attempting to destroy research records and evidence related to, presumably, a cloning lab. Dr. Pershing's transmission about a "catastrophic failure" of recent trials connects to The Child, a "donor" with a "high M count", referring to midi-chlorians; the transmission is only three days old, meaning that not only are Pershing and Moff Gideon alive, but that The Child is still in grave danger. It's revealed that one of Gideon's spies planted a tracking beacon in the Razor Crest, and that Gideon has a small army of Dark Troopers available at his disposal. </p>

<p> On the planet Corvus, Ahsoka Tano decimates mercenaries under the employ of Calodan magistrate Morgan Elsbeth. The Mandalorian and The Child land on Corvus in search of Tano but happen upon Elsbeth first, who hires him to take out the Jedi. However, The Mandalorian intends to work with Tano in order to return The Child to his people. Din Djarin learns from Ahsoka that The Child's name is, in fact, Grogu, and that he was under the tutelage of many Jedi masters before being spirited away and hidden from the emerging Galactic Empire. Ahsoka tests Grogu's abilities, ultimately determining that, due to his attachment to Din Djarin, it would be better to let his Force-attuned abilities fade rather than risk bringing another Darth Vader into the world. After liberating Calodan, and defeating the Magistrate and the gunslinger Lang, Ahsoka tells Din Djarin to take Grogu to the Force-attuned planet of Tython and place him on a seeing stone. Grogu will be able to choose his own fate there, though that may call other Jedi (or other Force-sensitive beings) to him. They part ways, and Ahsoka departs in search of Thrawn and, presumably, Ezra Bridger. </p>

<p> Karr is a teenage boy like many others in the galaxy. He goes to school, helps his parents with the family business, likes speeders and droids. But Karr also has a secret: when he touches certain objects, he gets searing headaches and blacks out. And along with the pain sometimes come visions of people he doesn't know and places he's never been. Karr's parents worry that he's sick; his grandmother is convinced the visions come from the Force. But it's been years since anyone has heard from the last of the Jedi-Luke Skywalker. Are there any Jedi left to guide Karr in the use of his abilities? Is anyone even willing to talk about the Jedi and what happened to them, as their memory continues to fade and the First Order rises? Stuck on his isolated home planet, Karr becomes a collector of historical artifacts, hoping to one day find an object that will give him a vision about the secrets of the Jedi.When his grandmother dies and his parents announce they're sending him away to a school on the other side of the planet, Karr reaches his breaking point. He needs to know what his destiny holds, and whether the Jedi are involved. Accompanied by Maize, the blunt, unpredictable new girl at school with ties to the First Order, and RZ-7, Karr's solicitous droid companion, he sets off into the larger galaxy to find the truth. His adventures will take him from Utapau to Jakku to Takodana and beyond as he learns more about the Jedi than he could have expected and about his own place in the Force </p>

<p> Now tracking a lead on the desert planet Pasaana, Rey, Finn, Poe, Chewbacca, C-3PO and BB-8 wander among the native Aki-Aki during their Festival of the Ancestors. However, Ren makes a connection with Rey that allows him to not only reach out and make physical contact (grabbing her newly obtained necklace), but also to learn of their location. As the First Order arrives to neutralize them, Lando Calrissian rescues them instead, giving them temporary sanctuary and putting them on the trail of Ochi, who was known to possess a wayfinder. They're only able to find his remains after escaping Jet Troopers and sinking through the quicksand-like sinking fields, discovering a network of underground tunnels. Ochi's remains reveal a Sith dagger, inscribed with text that C-3PO can read but is prohibited from translating the forbidden language due to his programming. The group is nearly attacked by a giant sand worm but Rey uses Force healing to salve its wounds and pacify it. </p>

<p> Their quest takes them to Kijimi where the First Order is aggressively going door to door in search of Resistance members. They run into Poe's former consort Zorri Bliss, who reveals that Poe used to be a spice runner; she eventually agrees to lead them to renowned droidsmith, Babu Frik. Since C-3PO's existing memory banks will be wiped in the effort to get the Sith intel, the reliable protocol droid bids a fond farewell to his friends before the deed is done; don't worry, he's safely rebooted. They manage to get intel on the location of Palpatine's wayfinder--on the ocean moon of Kef Bir--and use Zorri's First Order officer's medallion to get them through the security blockade. They use it to sneak onto the First Order Star Destroyer, rescue Chewie and retrieve the dagger. In doing so, Rey makes a connection to the dagger's history, seeing Ochi kill her parents in the past, but also connects to Kylo Ren. They engage in a lightsaber duel across space before Kylo Ren reveals that there's more to Rey's parentage. </p>

<p> Now, both sides of the battle are aware of the wayfinder's location, but the Resistance fighters get to Endor's ocean moon Kef Bir first. There, they befriend local native Jannah, a former stormtrooper by the call sign of TZ-1719, who leads them to the Death Star II ruins, the location of the wayfinder. Rey uses the Sith dagger's pop-out map device to find the exact spot in the slowly decaying ruins; she heads there using a skimmer despite the raging sea. Once she discovers it, Rey experiences a vision of herself as a Sith wielding a double-bladed red lightsaber. Soon after, Kylo Ren arrives, destroys the wayfinder, and duels Rey again in an epic battle. Though Finn tries to intervene, Rey keeps him at bay. Kylo Ren holds the upper hand throughout the fight until Leia calls out to him through the Force, distracting him long enough for Rey to impale him. However, she then Force heals his mortal wound before stealing his TIE fighters to fly off to self-imposed exile on Ahch-To. Kylo Ren soon recovers and experiences a vision with Han Solo, which encourages Kylo Ren to throw his lightsaber away and become Ben Solo once more. </p>

<p> There are plenty of upcoming shows that will leave the viewer more than attached to the screen—especially the expansion after the battle of Yavin. In addition, shows like The Mandalorian, the Book of Boba Fett or Ahsoka will explore further these characters and world. For next year, The Mandalorian season 3 is expected, however, there is no date announced yet. The Book of Boba Fett is confirmed to come during Christmas of 2021, being first announced after the end of The Mandalorian season 2. Andor is set to be released at some point in 2022, but a date is yet to be announced. Many other shows have been confirmed, but are so early in production that not much information came out yet. For example, Star Wars: Rangers of the New Republic, The Acolyte, and Lando. In the literature side of the Universe, Star Wars: Thrawn Ascendancy: Lesser Evil will arrive on November 16. It will be the last book in Thrawn's prequel trilogy. It tells the story of Chiss Ascendancy going to war. Thrawn is then pushed to reveal dark secrets if he wants to save his home planet. An excerpt of the book is already available for the more curious ones that do not want to lose time and want to start unveiling the plot. </p>

<p> 9-11 ABY – Din Djarin and Grogu meet Ahsoka Tano, who is searching for Ezra and Thrawn. Ahsoka leads the duo to Tython, where Grogu connects with an unknown Jedi with the help of a peculiar ancient stone. As Grogu is captured by Gideon and his dark troopers, Din Djarin is helped by Boba Fett and his partner Fennec Shand, who were looking for Boba's set of armor, which Din had come across on Tatooine before. Eventually, they find and rescue Grogu with the help of Bo-Katan and other allies. Luke Skywalker saves the day and takes Grogu away to continue his Jedi training. Djarin obtains the Darksaber from Gideon. Boba Fett takes over Jabba's dominion on Tatooine before facing the insidious Pyke Syndicate. Later, he's helped by Din Djarin and Grogu (who decides to return to his father of sorts) and manages to repel all the invaders. Luke begins building the Jedi Temple on Ossus. </p>

<p> 34 ABY – Resistance pilot Poe Dameron obtains part of a map with details of Luke Skywalker's location. First Order trooper FN-2187 (aka Finn) leaves the nefarious faction and comes across Rey and BB-8 (Poe's droid) on Jakku after the pilot seemingly dies. Finn and Rey leave Jakku with the now-abandoned Millennium Falcon and come across Han Solo and Chewbacca, who regain control of the ship. The First Order destroys the entire Hosnian system with the Starkiller Base, effectively erasing the New Republic's government and standing fleet. Rey finds the lost Skywalker lightsaber, which she rejects and is instead picked up by Finn. The First Order captures Rey, who eventually frees herself as Han Solo, Chewie, and Finn come to the rescue. Kylo Ren (Ben Solo) kills Han, and the Resistance destroys the Starkiller as Rey connects with the Force and finally accepts the Skywalker lightsaber before wounding Kylo. After returning to D'Qar and meeting with Leia, Rey departs alongside R2-D2 and Chewbacca to find Luke on Ahch-To. </p>

<p> 35 ABY – Palpatine reveals that his spirit survived inside a damaged clone body and that he and his Sith Eternal cult have been building a massive fleet of planet-killing star destroyers on Exegol, a hidden ancient world of the Sith. Snoke was just a puppet, and the First Order was unaware of these plans, which is why the new Supreme Leader, Kylo Ren, faces the phantom emperor and learns about Rey's true bloodline and heritage. After some cat-and-mouse games, Rey stabs Kylo Ren with the restored Skywalker lightsaber before healing him with the Force and leaving for Ahch-To, where she learns about Leia's partial Jedi training and obtains her lightsaber too. The location of Exegol is revealed and shared with the Resistance, which leads to an attack on Palpatine's fleet and the subsequent uprising across the galaxy against the First Order and the Sith Eternal's forces. A restored Palpatine almost kills both Rey and Ben Solo before he's destroyed for good by his granddaughter with the help of fallen Jedi. A redeemed Ben Solo then uses his life energy to save Rey from certain death, becoming one with the Force. The Final Order falls and the galaxy is free once again. </p>

<p> With a production budget of $115 million, grossed $28.5 million in its first day of showings, and reached the $100 million level in a record five days; grossed $64.8 million in its opening weekend, and $431 million (domestic), $474 million (lifetime domestic gross) and $1,022 million (worldwide); nominated for 3 Academy Awards (Best Sound, Best Sound Effects Editing, Best Visual Effects), winning none; set 32 years before the original Star Wars films; introduced the young Darth Vader as 9 year old boy Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd), and his future love interest - slightly older Queen Amidala (Natalie Portman); also introduced CGI clumsy sidekick Jar Jar Binks (Ahmed Best). It was the highest-grossing (domestic) film of 1999, besting second-place The Sixth Sense (1999) at $293.5 million. It was the highest-grossing film (unadjusted for inflation) of the entire Star Wars saga, and the 4th highest-grossing (domestic) film of all-time (to date). Best scenes: the pod race through the Tatooine desert, and the epic lightsaber duel. </p>

<p> With a production budget of $115 million, grossed $80 million in its opening weekend (May, 2002); opened six months later in about 60 IMAX theatres; grossed $302.2 million (domestic), eventually earning $310.7 million (domestic lifetime gross), and $649.4 million (worldwide); nominated for only one Academy Award (Best Visual Effects), without a win; shot on Digital Video using a new 24-frame, High-Definition, Progressive scan camera; the title Attack of the Clones is a misnomer - the clones don't attack, but come to the defense of the Jedi; set 10 years after Episode 1, with Anakin Skywalker (Hayden Christensen) now a 19 year-old Padawan (apprentice Jedi knight) to Obi Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor). It had stiff competition in 2002, against # 1 highest-grossing (domestic) film Spider-Man (2002) at $403.7 million, and # 2 film, The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2002) at $340 million. Best scenes: the breathtaking aerial chase through the asteroid field, and the light-saber duel between the good Yoda and the evil Count Dooku (Christopher Lee). </p>

<p> With a production budget of $113 million, grossed $108 million in its opening weekend (May, 2005); released on the 28th anniversary of the release of Star Wars, and the first of the films to receive a PG-13 rating; grossed $380.3 million (domestic) and almost $849 million (worldwide); nominated for only one Academy Award (Best Makeup), without a win; showed how Luke Skywalker's father, Anakin (Christensen), went from a Jedi apprentice to the galaxy-crushing villain Darth Vader. The Sith was the evil sect that corrupted Anakin by drawing him into the dark side of the Force - the cosmic power and living energy field that balanced the universe. It was the # 1 highest-grossing (domestic) film of 2005, besting second-place The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, The Witch, and the Wardrobe (2005) at $291.7 million. It was the # 2 highest-grossing (worldwide) film of 2005, just behind Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (2005) at almost $897 million. Best scene: the opening space battle. </p>

<p> One of the first official Star Wars spin-offs. A notoriously bad, two-hour variety TV special for Thanksgiving season that aired on CBS-TV on November 17, 1978 - it featured the original cast members (Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, C-3PO - Anthony Daniels, Chewbacca - Peter Mayhew) and guest stars including Bea Arthur, Art Carney, Harvey Korman, Diahann Carroll, and the rock group Jefferson Starship. The incomprehensible plot involved Han Solo with his Millennium Falcon getting Chewbacca home to his family for celebration of the Wookiee holiday - called "Life Day." The first 15 minutes of the special were entirely in Wookieese without subtitles! The rest of the film involved long musical numbers and variety performances, including an animated cartoon that introduced bounty hunter Boba Fett of The Empire Strikes Back, and the end song - Fisher hideously singing the "Life Day" song. Lucas reportedly ordered no further airings and destruction of the master videos (so there would be no video/DVD release), while the bootlegged, poorly-dubbed video was circulated among fans for years. </p>

<p> Family Guy: Blue Harvest (2007) was the (6th) season premiere show of the Fox-TV animated show Family Guy which first aired on September 23, 2007. It was an hour-long spoof authorized by Lucas (to celebrate Star Wars' 30th anniversary) composed of CG-animating over previously-filmed live action shots, with the show's characters appearing in Star Wars (1977) roles, and the use of the musical score from the film. Over the next four years (2007-2011), the show created its own 'trilogy' of the original films with scene-by-scene make-overs featuring the Family Guy cast as Star Wars characters. The Empire Strikes Back (1980) was parodied in Family Guy: Something, Something, Something Dark Side (2009), airing first on December 22, 2009 as the season finale of the 8th season of the show. Family Guy: It's a Trap (2011) was a spoof of Return of the Jedi (1983), serving as the finale of the 9th season of the show airing on May 22, 2011. </p>

<p> The Rebel Alliance has attacked the tyrannical evil Galactic Empire, daringly stealing secret plans to the Empire's new battle station, the Death Star. In the opening view, the small Rebel ship belonging to Princess Leia, who possesses the secret plans, is chased across the screen by a large, wedge-shaped Imperial Star Destroyer cruiser of the evil Galactic Empire. Turbolasers strike the Rebel ship's shields and cause its passengers to be buffeted around in a corridor, including two robot droids, a tiny, round barrel-shaped, whistling and bleeping computer robot named R2-D2 (Artoo Detoo) (Kenny Baker), and its robotic pal, the constantly talking, tall gold-plated C-3PO (See Threepio) (Anthony Daniels). [C-3PO is clearly modeled after the female robot in Lang's Metropolis (1927).] Armed soldiers run down the hallway. Nervous as explosions rock the ship, C-3PO is pessimistic about their escape from the Imperialistic Forces, because their main reactor has been shut down: "We're doomed. There'll be no escape for the Princess this time." R2-D2 whistles and bleeps a response. Their ship is sucked into the underbelly of the huge, armored space vehicle by a tractor beam. </p>

<p> Deciding that the droid is too small to run away, the restraining bolt placed on R2-D2 by the Jawas is removed. Instantly, the message and the lady disappear. R2-D2 stubbornly refuses to play it again - the message will only be played for Obi-Wan Kenobi. Luke is interrupted, called to dinner by his aunt. C-3PO scolds his companion: "Just you reconsider playing that message for him." During the dinner conversation, Luke tells his uncle: "I think that R2 unit we bought might have been stolen...I stumbled across a recording while I was cleaning it. He says he belongs to someone called Obi-Wan Kenobi. I thought he might have meant Old Ben." Both of Luke's relatives turn silent. Luke's uncle, believing "that wizard's just a crazy old man," instructs Luke to erase the memory of the robot the next day because the droid now belongs to them. Luke worries that Obi-Wan may come looking for his robot, but his father answers: "He won't. I don't think he exists anymore. He died about the same time as your father." [Luke is an orphan, cared for by his aunt and uncle.] Luke excitedly asks: "He knew my father?" Owen refuses to answer and wishes the subject dropped: "I told you to forget it." </p>

<p> Outside, white-robed Luke stands on a small rise, watching Tatooine's twin suns setting near the horizon. [Tatooine has a binary star system - therefore, he can watch two sunsets every night.] He believes he may never fulfill his dream of piloting a starship to distant worlds, never escaping from the dry arid desert of Tatooine. Returning to the robots in the garage, Luke finds C-3PO hiding and scared: "It wasn't my fault, sir! Please don't de-activate me!" According to C-3PO, R2-D2 is "faulty, malfunctioning. He kept babbling on about his mission" and then wandered off into the desert night. Luke scans the horizon with a pair of electro-binoculars equipped with night-vision, but R2-D2 is nowhere to be seen. Luke decides they must wait until morning to search for him: "It's too dangerous with all the Sand People around...That little droid's gonna cause me a lot of trouble." C-3PO concurs: "Oh, he excels at that, sir." </p>

<p> The next morning, without telling his uncle, Luke and C-3PO give chase into the desert after runaway R2-D2 in a jet-propelled landspeeder, a vehicle which skims a foot off the ground. They are watched from high on a ridge by two dangerous, nomadic warriors called Tusken Raiders (Sand People), riding on shaggy, elephant-like creatures. The landspeeder quickly catches up to R2-D2, who immediately senses and urgently warns them that there are "several creatures approaching from the southeast." Luke guesses Sand People are attacking. He grabs his laser rifle and binoculars and runs to a nearby hill to look for them. As he scans the land, one of the Sand People rises up in front of him with a battle-axe. Luke blocks some of the blows, but is knocked to the ground as the Raider shrieks and raises his axe. Luke faints and is dragged down to the landspeeder where a group of Sand People plan to ransack his vehicle. R2-D2 hides in a small crevice in the rocks. </p>

<p> While Obi-Wan guards the ship, Qui-Gon, the droid R2-D2, Jar Jar, and a handmaiden, Padmy, journey to Anakin's nearby city, Mos Espa, seeking replacement parts for the Cruiser. They meet Anakin, whom Qui-Gon senses to be an extraordinary being, perhaps even Jedi material. Drawn to Padmy, in spite of the difference in their ages, and wanting to impress her, Anakin shows the little group his half-finished protocol droid, and the pod racer he has built and hidden. Then he leads the Jedi to Watto's shop, but Watto refuses to accept Republic credits in payment for the needed parts, and Qui-Gon, claiming to own a pod racer, makes a racing bet with Watto, but only if Anakin is supplied to pilot "Qui-Gon's" racer. If Anakin wins, then Watto supplies the needed parts and takes the winnings. If Anakin doesn't win, Watto gets Qui-Gon's Nabooan cruiser. </p>

<p> Meanwhile, Anakin struggles to control the alien star fighter he's flying. In an attempt to elude pursuers, he streaks along the side of the Federation Battleship, but finds the only way to elude them is to fly right into the ship's main hangar. In the power station Darth Maul and Qui-Gon have fought their way into the melting pit, leaving Obi-Wan behind, blocked by a laser field. Tiring, Qui-Gon makes a slip, and Darth Maul wounds him fatally. Obi-Wan, finally released from the laser field, mounts a fierce attack on Darth Maul which succeeds in driving him back, but strength and experience allow the Sith to smash Obi-Wan's light saber, and push him over the edge toward the melting pit. At the last minute Obi-Wan manages grab hold and stay his fall. Then he wills himself to get in touch with The Force, to calm himself, and with a supreme effort somersaults backward away from the pit, grabs Qui-Gon's light saber and cuts Darth Maul through the chest with a killing slash that catapults the Sith over the edge and into the pit. </p>

<p> The five versions of Star Wars, all written by George Lucas, which I have examined are: the first 1973 story synopsis (The Star Wars), the rough screenplay draft from 1974 (The Star Wars), the 1975 second draft (The Adventures of the Starkiller (Episode One): “The Star Wars”), the third draft finished in 1975 (The Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller), and the public version of the 1976 revised fourth draft (Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills). I obtained the synopsis and the first three drafts through the Internet. These versions have been acquired by collectors and later been scanned or typed into electronic text documents – they have never been published commercially. All the drafts used for this essay were found at the Starkiller Multimedia Source Page (maintained by Owen S. Good), which is dedicated to pre-Star Wars material. Besides the Internet, the public version of the revised fourth draft is available in The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope (edited by Carol Titelman), which also contains many pre-production sketches and paintings. Two additional draft versions were obtained through the Internet and read: the first draft from 1974 (The Star Wars), and the shooting script version of the revised fourth draft (The Adventures of Luke Starkiller – As Taken from the “Journal of the Whills” (Saga I): Star Wars). However, these two screenplays were not distinct enough from the others to be handled in individual chapters. Most of the information about George Lucas was gathered from Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, written in 1983 by Dale Pollock. I also read other specialist literature on both science fiction and Star Wars, but much of my inspiration came from different Internet sources (Brendon Wahlberg’s “The Development of Star Wars: A New Hope” was very helpful, as it contains comprehensive summaries of some of the drafts). Furthermore, the Star Wars trilogy, the scripts to The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, and the three comic book adaptations were fundamental to the writing of this essay. </p>

<p> The Adventures of the Starkiller (Episode One): “The Star Wars” was the title of Lucas’ second draft which was delivered on January 28, 1975. This was a more character-driven story with more character development, which was important since Lucas wanted the film to make an emotional impact. Lucas had realized that his first screenplay would not fit into one movie, so he put a large part of the rough draft aside when writing the second. Since he now had material for three films, he decided that he would use the deleted parts if he ever got the opportunity to do any sequels. In his striving to create his own perfectly coherent universe, Lucas began writing an outline about the characters, where they came from, and what would happen to them after the film itself ended. This backup story would later result in his vision of a nine part saga spanning more than fifty-five years. He let his friends (among them director Francis Ford Coppola) read the scripts and tape-recorded their comments in order to get some advice. However, the suggestions from his wife Marcia (a film editor who later won an Oscar for Star Wars) were the ones he took most seriously, even though her criticism sometimes made him angry. </p>

<p> Lucas’ revised fourth draft was the one which was used when filming began in Tunisia on March 25, 1976. A slightly edited version of this draft, entitled Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills, was published in 1979 as the official screenplay of the film (the final editing of that public version – erroneously dated to January 15, 1976 – was done after Star Wars went into production, probably after the film’s May 1977 release). Lucas had consulted his co-writers from American Graffiti (Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz) to sharpen the dialogue, which he felt lacked humour and bounce, and although he rejected most of what they came up with, their new ideas gave Lucas renewed confidence in his work. Another inspiration for the later Star Wars drafts was Ralph McQuarrie, an illustrator who was hired to do production sketches and paintings for the film. He helped Lucas to envision his characters by drawing them for him and pointing out what would make them look better on film. </p>

<p> The Plot The galaxy is plagued by a civil war between an evil Empire and rebel forces. Two bickering Imperial bureaucrats try to flee from a space fortress which is under attack, and crash land on the planet of Aquilae. A wanted rebel princess and her relentless general Luke Skywalker, on their way to a space port in order to get the princess to safety, find and capture them and after a hazardous journey the group make it to a religious temple where they discover a band of young boy rebels. The boys decide to follow them across the wasteland in spite of the general’s reluctance, and they soon reach a shabby cantina near the space port where the general is forced to use his “lazer sword” to kill a bully who is taunting one of the boys. The group, pursued by Imperial troops, must steal a fighter ship in order to escape and after a long chase they manage to hide in an asteroid field. However, the rebels’ ship is damaged and they are forced to jettison towards the forbidden planet of Yavin with rocket packs. On Yavin, they travel on “jet-sticks” made from their rocket packs, until they are attacked by giant furry aliens who capture the princess and the bureaucrats and sell them to an Imperial platoon. Skywalker is almost killed, but one of the aliens helps to take him to an old farmer who know where the Imperial outpost is. After an attack on the outpost, the general and the boys learn that the princess has been taken to Alderaan, a “city-planet” and the capitol of the Empire. After rigorous training, Skywalker and the young rebels man a squadron of fighter ships, and disguised as Imperial rangers they manage to reach the prison complex of Alderaan. They free the princess, but an alarm goes off and a few of the boys are killed before the group is able to escape to the friendly planet of Ophuchi. There, everyone (including the bureaucrats) are rewarded at a ceremony, as the princess reveals her true goddess-like self. </p>

<p> At first they do not realize that they are the general’s captives. They believe that they have managed to infiltrate the rebels, and plan to steal the princess’s aura spice. However, as the story evolves, the pair come to know better, and they end up being rewarded for their participation in the rebellion. If the general is inhuman, the bureaucrats are very human, something that makes them easily identifiable. They argue with each other, they get terrified when there is a fight, and they get drunk when they realize that they have been adventuring with a goddess-like princess. We do not learn much about the remaining characters. The young boys are idealistic and brave (much like the Luke Skywalker of the 1977 film), the Empire is led by an evil Sovereign who never takes part in the actual story, one of the giant furry aliens is kind (an early version of Chewbacca in the final film), and the rebels get help from a cantankerous farmer who is married to an alien and hates the Empire. </p>

<p> Kane Starkiller, a Jedi-Bendu master, is in hiding on the Fourth Moon of Utapau with his two sons Annikin and Deak, when a Sith warrior finds them and Deak is killed. The surviving Starkillers head to the Aquilae system, where they are met by Kane’s old Jedi friend, General Luke Skywalker. Kane, whose war-battered body is a concoction of artificial limbs, knows that he is dying, and persuades Luke to become Annikin’s Jedi teacher. He then travels to the city of Gordon, leaving his son with Skywalker and the King of Aquilae. Clieg Whitsun, a rebel spy on the emperor’s planet of Alderaan, has learned that an Imperial fleet, led by General Darth Vader and Governor Crispin Hoedaack, is about to conquer Aquilae with a “death star” space fortress. Rebel fighters are sent out to stop the attack, but the Aquilaean king is killed, and instead of Princess Leia (the rightful heir), a corrupt senator takes over, surrendering the planet to the Empire. </p>

<p> Annikin, Luke and Whitsun, joined by Artwo Detwo and See Threepio (two bickering robots who have escaped from the space fortress), bring Leia and her two younger brothers to the spaceport at Gordon, from where they can reach safety. After a fight at a cantina, where Skywalker uses his “lasersword” to kill his antagonists, the group meet up with Kane and his alien friend Han Solo who have arranged transport to a friendly planet. They need a power unit for suspended animation in order to get past Imperial scanners, and Kane heroically rips one from his body, causing his death. After avoiding a trap set by Vader and Prince Valorum (the black Knight of the Sith), the rebels are pursued into space, where the arguing Leia and Annikin realize that they love each other. Their craft is damaged in an asteroid field and Whitsun dies as it explodes, but the others abandon ship in time and land on the jungle planet of Yavin, where Leia is captured by alien trappers. Annikin tries to rescue her, but only succeeds in freeing five “Wookees” (huge, grey and furry beasts), and Leia eventually ends up in the hands of the Empire. </p>

<p> After a tip from two anthropologists, the rebels and the Wookee tribe (including Prince Chewbacca) attack an Imperial outpost, and a forest battle ensues. When he learns that Leia is held captive aboard the space fortress, General Skywalker starts training the Wookees to fly fighter ships in order to conquer the death star. Annikin is sceptical of the plan and gets onto the fortress (together with Artwo) on a mission of his own, dressed as an Imperial “skyraider”, but he is soon captured and tortured by General Vader. Valorum sees this and realizes that the Imperials are completely without honour and codes, and that he has more in common with the young Jedi than with the emperor. Turning his back on the Empire, he frees both Annikin and Leia, and they escape down a garbage chute. After almost being crushed in the garbage receptacle, Valorum, Leia, Annikin, and Artwo manage to abandon the station just before the Wookees destroy it, killing both Vader and Governor Hoedaack. Back in her throne room, Queen Leia honours the heroes (including Valorum), and Annikin is appointed new Lord Protector of Aquilae. </p>

<p> Deak and Clieg, sons of the Starkiller, are on their way to their brother Luke on the planet Utapau, sent by their father to retrieve the diamond-like “Kiber Crystal” which a Jedi can use to intensify either side of the force a hundred fold. However, their ship is boarded by Lord Darth Vader (a Black Knight of the Sith) and his stormtroopers, and Clieg is killed. Vader believes that Deak is the last son of the Starkiller, and as Deak wears his father’s crest, the Lord takes for granted that the Starkiller is dead, and that he has altered destiny by capturing “the son of the suns”. Vader orders the attack of the rebel base on Ogana Major, not knowing that Artoo Detoo and See Threepio, two of Deak’s robots (or “droids”), have escaped to Utapau in order to bring a message to Luke. After a run-in with some filthy “Jawa” scavengers, they reach the farm where Luke lives with his two younger brothers Biggs and Windy, his Uncle Owen Lars and Aunt Beru, and their daughter Leia. Luke has never met his legendary father, and when he learns that he must bring the crystal to him he feels intimidated. Owen has taught Luke the ways of a skilled warrior (including the “laser sword”), but the spiritual ways of the Jedi can be taught only by his father. </p>

<p> As Luke uses the Kiber Crystal to heal his brother, he receives a mental message from his father, telling him to come to the new rebel base on the fourth moon of Yavin. On the jungle moon, Luke meets his wizened old father for the first time, but the “Death Star” (the battle station which destroyed Ogana Major) is approaching, and Luke’s Jedi training will have to wait. An assault on the station is organized, but Han, content with his momentous reward, leaves with Chewbacca and Montross, refusing to help. With Threepio and the ranger Bail Antilles as his gunners, Luke pilots one of the rebel ships attacking the Death Star, while his father uses the crystal to fight the Bogan. Sensing the Ashla, Lord Vader realizes that the Starkiller is alive, and joins the battle in his own fighter. He is just about to destroy Luke’s ship, when Han reappears, sending the Sith knight to his doom. In a final attempt, both Threepio and Antilles manage to hit the station’s weak point, reducing the mighty fortress to space dust. Back at the base, the heroes are greeted by the Starkiller who praises their victory as the start of the revolution. </p>

<p> Cleaning Artoo, he stumbles upon the hologram message, in which Leia wants the droids delivered to Organa Major and says that she has been taken to Alderaan. Luke runs away from home with the droids in order to get help from General Ben Kenobi, a Jedi knight his father had told him about. After being attacked by barbaric “Tusken Raiders”, Luke is found by old Ben who claims he has become too old for adventures, proving his point by angrily cracking open his artificial arm. After some thought, Ben changes his mind, but since he has little Force left in him, he starts teaching Luke about the Force of Others as they leave with the droids for Mos Eisley spaceport. On Alderaan, Vader and his fellow Sith Lords feel something old awakening, strengthening the Force. After using his “laser-sword” to defend Luke against some creatures at a Mos Eisley cantina, Ben and his friends follow a furry “Wookiee” called Chewbacca to a nearby docking bay where they are introduced to a cocky starpilot named Han Solo who agrees to take them to Organa Major for a considerable amount of money. Han tricks some evil pirates – including Jabba the Hutt, the financier of his ship – into leaving the docking area, and as the heroes leave Mos Eisley, a furious Jabba is left behind. </p>

<p> Aboard the ship, Ben feels that something horrible has happened, and when they reach Organa Major they find the planet destroyed by the Empire. Now they must rescue the princess from the Imperial city of Alderaan in order to find the rebels. At Alderaan, their ship is boarded by stormtroopers, but only Threepio is found since the others are hiding in scan-proof lockers. Luke and Han steal stormtrooper uniforms, and with Chewbacca posing as their prisoner, they leave for the detention area, where they wreak havoc and find the tortured Leia. The groggy princess takes command of the situation, and after getting past a “Dia Nogu” monster, they jump down a chute leading to a garbage masher from where they are saved by the droids. Using the Force and his laser-sword, Ben has managed to retrieve one of the Kiber Crystals, but he meets Vader on his way back, and a duel commences. As the others make it to the hangar, Ben slams down a blast door between Vader and himself, and everybody manages to escape in Han’s ship. </p>

<p> Above Tatooine, Leia’s ship is overtaken by an Imperial Stardestroyer. Leia is captured by Darth Vader (the Emperor’s Dark Lord of the Sith), but his stormtroopers do not find the plans. Artoo-Detoo and See-Threepio, two Rebel robots (or “droids”), abandon the ship in a lifepod, crashing in the Tatooine desert. Imperials locate the pod, but the data is not there – the robots have been captured by “Jawa” scavengers. Luke Skywalker has spotted the space battle with his “electrobinoculars”, but his friends at Anchorhead do not believe him. Luke’s best friend Biggs Darklighter is the first mate on a space frigate, but as an Academy graduate he is likely to be drafted into the Imperial Starfleet, thus he has decided to jump ship and join the Rebellion. The Jawas’ “Sandcrawler” arrives at the farm where Luke lives with his Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru, and the two droids are sold to Owen. Luke is cleaning Artoo when a hologram of Leia appears, begging for the help of an Obi-Wan Kenobi. Luke wonders if she means the hermit Ben Kenobi, but Owen claims that Ben is dead. Owen further upsets Luke by telling him that he cannot go to the Academy since he is needed at the farm. </p>

<p> Meanwhile, Artoo has escaped, and Luke and Threepio leave in a “Landspeeder” in search for him. Upon finding Artoo, they are attacked by vicious “Tusken Raiders”, but the creatures are chased away by an old man who turns out to be Ben (Obi-Wan) Kenobi. At Ben’s dwelling, Luke receives his father’s “lightsaber”, learning that his father and Ben were Jedi Knights. The Jedi served as peace keepers of the Old Republic, but were hunted and killed as the Empire grew. According to Ben, Darth Vader, a pupil of his, was seduced by the dark side of “the Force” (an energy field which binds the galaxy together) and murdered Luke’s father. Leia’s hologram tells Ben about her capture and asks him to deliver Artoo to her father on Alderaan, since the droid contains vital information. Luke declines to follow Ben to Alderaan, but agrees to take him as far as Anchorhead. On their way, they find the Jawas killed by what seem to be Imperial troopers. Luke drives home, fearing for the lives of Owen and Beru, but only their smouldering remains are left. </p>

<p> Meeting up with Ben, Luke says that he will go to Alderaan, learn about the Force, and become a Jedi. At Mos Eisley Spaceport, Ben uses the Force to get past Imperial guards, and when Luke is threatened by some hideous creatures in a cantina, the old Jedi shows his lightsaber skills. Han Solo (captain of a ship called the Millennium Falcon) and Chewbacca (his “Wookiee” co-pilot) agree to take the group to Alderaan if they are well paid, and Luke and his friends leave to sell the speeder. Han avoids getting killed by a bounty hunter at the cantina, but back at his ship he is confronted by the mercenary’s employer – Jabba the Hut. Solo is heavily in debt to Jabba, and the alien pirate threatens to put a large prize on Han’s head if he does not pay him soon. The Empire is on their trail, but Luke, Ben, the droids, Han, and Chewbacca manage to escape into hyperspace with the Falcon. </p>

<p> 1. When Artoo plays Leia’s hologram recording, Luke’s curiosity is aroused. 2. When the droid escapes, Luke meets old Ben and learns about his Jedi heritage, realizing why he does not feel at home at his uncle’s farm. 3. As Owen and Beru are killed, Luke leaves his old life behind him and joins Ben to help the Alliance. 4. Aboard the Millennium Falcon, Luke begins his Jedi training, proving that he is able to control the Force. 5. During the escape from the Death Star, he is forced to develop both cunning and bravery. 6. Luke is on his own when Kenobi is killed, but through the mysterious powers of the Force, the old Jedi still guides him. 7. Luke proves his independence by manning one of the Falcon’s gunports and destroying several pursuing TIE fighters. 8. During the Battle of Yavin, Luke pilots a one-man fighter. 9. Even though the other X-wings retreat or are shot down, Luke continues along the Death Star trench leading to the Rebels’ target. 10. Eventually, Luke switches off his targeting computer, relying solely on the Force as he fires a torpedo into the exhaust port – it is Luke and the Force against the Galactic Empire. 170 </p>

<p> Other notable changes in the first draft are as follows (with the rough draft equivalent in brackets): Justin, Akira and Bink Valor (Annikin, Kane and Deak Starkiller); Zara, Oeta and Puck (Leia, Biggs and Windy); Captain Dodona (Prince Valorum); A-2 and C-3 (R2D2 and C3PO); King Son Hhat and Governor Mara Horus (Emperor Cos Dashit and Governor Crispin Hoedaack); Clieg Oxus (Clieg Whitsun); Boma (Chewbacca); Jawas (Wookees); Huu and Beru Tho (Owen and Beru Lars); Granicus (Alderaan); Plaza of the Donns (Plaza of the Daders); and Townowi (Aquilae). “Ogana” became a rebel planet in draft two, and was later modified into Leia’s last name “Organa”. The term “Dai Nogas” would turn into the film’s “Dia Nogu” trash monster, while the “Jawa” label would be transferred from the furry beasts to the desert scavengers. Some of the character names (like Oeta, Dodona, Oxus and Boma) would be reused or slightly altered in later drafts, but most of the first draft’s new additions were discarded. </p>

<p> The names and personalities of the characters underwent considerable shuffling during the writing of the drafts. The film’s Luke Skywalker got his name from the general of the first synopsis, and his idealism is a trait of the young rebel boys. His name is Annikin Starkiller in the rough draft, which applies Lucas’s own personality to the character. In the second and third draft, he is called Luke Starkiller, and evolves from a chubby researcher to an adventurous farm boy. The last screenplay establishes Luke Skywalker as a traditional fairy tale hero. The Darth Vader of the movie can be traced to three characters in the rough draft – General Vader, Kane Starkiller (a machine-like Jedi), and Prince Valorum (a Knight of the Sith). The two bureaucrats of the synopsis, modelled after two farmers in The Hidden Fortress, developed into the bickering R2-D2 and C-3PO. Ben Kenobi first appeared in the third script version, but his traits can be found in characters in the previous drafts. Leia does not go through much development (except for the second draft, where she is replaced by Deak), while Han starts out as a green-skinned monster, adopts the traits of Annikin, and becomes the cocksure personality of the film. The early drafts contain precursors to most of the characters in the Star Wars movie (like Chewbacca and the “Jawas”), as well as some of the characters in the sequels (like the Emperor, and Jabba the Hutt). </p>

<p> The religious theme is very subtle in the synopsis and rough draft, but in the last screenplays Lucas developed his idea of the “the Force”. At first, “the force of others” is very influenced by Christianity, complete with its own “story of the Creation”. However, inspired by Oriental philosophies and Carlos Castaneda’s “life force”, Lucas established the Force as a universal deity and means of introspection. The idea of technology in opposition to mankind came from Lucas’s 1971 film THX 1138, and Lucas used the struggle between the Empire and the Rebels as a metaphor for this theme. The bureaucrats in the synopsis are easily identifiable as their actions and reactions are human. These traits of humanity were later transferred to R2-D2 and C-3PO. The father/son relationship is very different from draft to draft: General Skywalker serves as a symbolic father figure for the boys in the synopsis; the rough draft features the self-sacrificing Kane as the father and General Skywalker as the hero’s mentor; Luke is intimidated by his legendary father in draft two; Luke remembers his late Jedi father with pride in the third draft while Ben is his teacher; the public version of the revised fourth draft gives very little information about Luke’s father, setting the scene for the revelations in the sequels. The theme of accepting one’s personal responsibilities is found in all the drafts. The first versions points out the importance of respect, facing one’s reality, and overcoming one’s fears. In the later drafts, Lucas incorporated mythological ideas and fairy tale motifs. As he takes his first steps into adulthood, Luke Skywalker accepts his destiny and realizes his true potential. </p>

<p> Secondary Sources “An Exclusive Interview with George Lucas: Part 3 of 3.” (1995) Star Wars: Jedins återkomst. AB Svensk Filmindustri’s widescreen edition. Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment. Brackett, Leigh & Kasdan, Lawrence & Lucas, George, Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back. Public version. (Internet source.) Brosnan, John (1991), The Primal Screen: A History of Science Fiction Film. London: Orbit Books. Classic Star Wars: A New Hope #1. (1994) Milwaukie: Dark Horse Comics. Classic Star Wars: A New Hope #2. (1994) Milwaukie: Dark Horse Comics. Classic Star Wars: Return of the Jedi #1. (1994) Milwaukie: Dark Horse Comics. Classic Star Wars: Return of the Jedi #2. (1994) Milwaukie: Dark Horse Comics. Classic Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back #1. (1994) Milwaukie: Dark Horse Comics. Classic Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back #2. (1994) Milwaukie: Dark Horse Comics. Fein, David C., Star Wars Compendium of Lost Footage. Version 3.0. (Internet source.) Kasdan, Lawrence & Lucas, George, Star Wars Episode VI: Revenge of the Jedi. Second draft. (Internet source.) Lim, Julie, The SW Names FAQ. Version 2.0. (Internet source.) Nemert-Svedlund, Elisabet & Rundblom, Gunilla (1987), Filmboken. Stockholm: Bokförlaget Natur och Kultur. Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas. First Samuel French edition. Hollywood: Samuel French Trade. Richie, Donald (1965), The Films of Akira Kurosawa. Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press. Slavicsek, Bill (1994), A Guide to the Star Wars Universe. Second edition. New York: Ballantine Books. Starkiller Multimedia Source Page. (Internet source.) The Star Wars Archive. (Internet source.) The Star Wars Home Page. (Internet source.) Star Wars: Jedins återkomst. (1995) AB Svensk Filmindustri’s widescreen edition. Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment. The Star Wars Portfolio by Ralph McQuarrie. (Internet source.) Star Wars: Rymdimperiet slår tillbaka. (1995) AB Svensk Filmindustri’s widescreen edition. Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment. Star Wars: Stjärnornas krig. (1995) AB Svensk Filmindustri’s widescreen edition. Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment. THX 1138. (1996) Aired April 6 on TV3, Sweden. Warner Bros. Pictures. Titelman, Carol (ed.) (1994), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope. Second edition. New York: Ballantine Books. Tringali, George, Star Wars: Frequently Asked Questions and Sources of Information. (Internet source.) Wahlberg, Brendon, The Development of Star Wars: A New Hope. Version 3.0. (Internet source.) </p>

<p> FOOTNOTES 1) Lucas, George (1994), Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills. Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 9. 2) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 134. 3) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 148. 4) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 143. 5) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 144. 6) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 142. 7) Brosnan, John (1991), The Primal Screen: A History of Science Fiction Film, p. 179. 8) Lucas, George, The Star Wars. Story synopsis. 9) Richie, Donald (1965), The Films of Akira Kurosawa, p. 134. 10) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 142. 11-12) Lucas, George, The Star Wars. Story synopsis. 13) Lim, Julie, The SW Names FAQ. 14-16) Lucas, George, The Star Wars. Story synopsis. 17) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 139. 18) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 140. 19) Lucas, George, The Star Wars. Rough draft. 20) “An Exclusive Interview with George Lucas: Part 3 of 3.” (1995) Star Wars: Jedins återkomst. 21) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 144. 22-27) Lucas, George, The Star Wars. Rough draft. 28) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 141. 29-31) Lucas, George, The Star Wars. Rough draft. 32) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 156. 33) Lucas, George, The Star Wars. Rough draft. 34) “An Exclusive Interview with George Lucas: Part 3 of 3.” (1995) Star Wars: Jedins återkomst. 35) Lucas, George, The Star Wars. Rough draft. 36) Lucas, George, The Star Wars. Rough draft. 37) Brosnan, John (1991), The Primal Screen: A History of Science Fiction Film, p. 179. 38) Lucas, George, The Star Wars. Rough draft. 39) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 148. 40) Lucas, George, The Star Wars. Rough draft. 41) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 138. 42-47) Lucas, George, The Star Wars. Rough draft. 48) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, pp. 146-147. 49-50) Lucas, George, The Adventures of the Starkiller (Episode One): “The Star Wars”. Second draft. 51) Slavicsek, Bill (1994), A Guide to the Star Wars Universe, p. 252. 52) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 146. 53-58) Lucas, George, The Adventures of the Starkiller (Episode One): “The Star Wars”. Second draft. 59) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 146. 60) Lucas, George, The Adventures of the Starkiller (Episode One): “The Star Wars”. Second draft. 61) Lucas, George, The Adventures of the Starkiller (Episode One): “The Star Wars”. Second draft. 62) “An Exclusive Interview with George Lucas: Part 3 of 3.” (1995) Star Wars: Jedins återkomst. 63) Lucas, George, The Adventures of the Starkiller (Episode One): “The Star Wars”. Second draft. 64) Kasdan, Lawrence & Lucas, George, Star Wars Episode VI: Revenge of the Jedi. 65) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 142. 66-69) Lucas, George, The Adventures of the Starkiller (Episode One): “The Star Wars”. Second draft. 69) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 145. 70-79) Lucas, George, The Adventures of the Starkiller (Episode One): “The Star Wars”. Second draft. 80) Lucas, George, The Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller. Third draft. 81) Tringali, George, Star Wars: Frequently Asked Questions and Sources of Information. 82) Slavicsek, Bill (1994), A Guide to the Star Wars Universe, p. 95. 83) Lucas, George, The Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller. Third draft. 84) Lucas, George, The Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller. Third draft. 85) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 146. 86-103) Lucas, George, The Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller. Third draft. 104) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 141. 105) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 140. 106) Lucas, George, The Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller. Third draft. 107) Kasdan, Lawrence & Lucas, George, Star Wars Episode VI: Revenge of the Jedi. 108-110) Lucas, George, The Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller. Third draft. 111) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 139. 112-115) Lucas, George, The Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller. Third draft. 116) Fein, David C., Star Wars Compendium of Lost Footage. 117) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 26. 118) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 28. 119) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 29. 120) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 111. 121) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 130. 122) Fein, David C., Star Wars Compendium of Lost Footage. 123) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 72. 124) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 72. 125) Fein, David C., Star Wars Compendium of Lost Footage. 126) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 11. 127) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 139. 128) Kasdan, Lawrence & Lucas, George, Star Wars Episode VI: Revenge of the Jedi. 129) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 25. 130) Nemert-Svedlund, Elisabet & Rundblom, Gunilla (1987), Filmboken, pp. 62-63. 131) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 149. 132) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 49. 133) Kasdan, Lawrence & Lucas, George, Star Wars Episode VI: Revenge of the Jedi. 134) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 95. 135) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 74. 136) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 65. 137) Nemert-Svedlund, Elisabet & Rundblom, Gunilla (1987), Filmboken, p. 65. 138) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 103. 139) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 135. 140) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 59. 141) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 149. 142) Slavicsek, Bill (1994), A Guide to the Star Wars Universe, pp. 478-480. 143) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 167. 144) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 46. 145) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 71. 146) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 9. 147) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 38. 148) Slavicsek, Bill (1994), A Guide to the Star Wars Universe, pp. 304 & 312. 149) Slavicsek, Bill (1994), A Guide to the Star Wars Universe, p. 487. 150) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 65. 151) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 72. 152) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 91. 153) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 160. 154) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 139. 155) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 49. 156) Brackett, Leigh & Kasdan, Lawrence & Lucas, George, Star Wars Episode V: The Empires Strikes Back. 157) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, pp. 139-140. 158) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 144. 159) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 52. 160) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 124. 161) “An Exclusive Interview with George Lucas: Part 3 of 3.” (1995) Star Wars: Jedins återkomst. 162) Lim, Julie, The SW Names FAQ. 163) Lucas, George (1994), “Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills.” Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 49. 164-166) Kasdan, Lawrence & Lucas, George, Star Wars Episode VI: Revenge of the Jedi. 167) Tringali, George, Star Wars: Frequently Asked Questions and Sources of Information. 168) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 139. 169) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 142. 170) Nemert-Svedlund, Elisabet & Rundblom, Gunilla (1987), Filmboken, pp. 64-65. 171) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 140. 172) Lucas, George, The Star Wars. Rough draft. 173) Lucas, George, The Star Wars. First draft. 174) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 164. 175) Lucas, George, The Adventures of Luke Starkiller – As Taken from the “Journal of the Whills” (Saga I): Star Wars. Revised fourth draft, shooting script version. 176) Lucas, George, The Adventures of Luke Starkiller – As Taken from the “Journal of the Whills” (Saga I): Star Wars. Revised fourth draft, shooting script version. 177) Fein, David C., Star Wars Compendium of Lost Footage. 178) Lucas, George, The Adventures of Luke Starkiller – As Taken from the “Journal of the Whills” (Saga I): Star Wars. Revised fourth draft, shooting script version. 179) Lucas, George, The Adventures of Luke Starkiller – As Taken from the “Journal of the Whills” (Saga I): Star Wars. Revised fourth draft, shooting script version. 180) Wahlberg, Brendon, The Development of Star Wars: A New Hope. 181) Wahlberg, Brendon, The Development of Star Wars: A New Hope. 182) Pollock, Dale (1990), Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas, p. 134. 183) Lucas, George (1994), Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope – From the Journal of the Whills. Revised fourth draft, public version. Titelman, Carol (ed.), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 9. </p>

<p> Lucas was toying with many ideas as he revised his screenplay drafts. At one point he had Luke as a sixteen-year-old girl who fell in love with Han Solo. This version was probably a revision of the second script, since the top painting, with Luke on a bluff overlooking Mos Eisley, lacks Ben (who was introduced in the third draft). Furthermore, Han was bearded in draft two, but not in the third script. The painting and sketches were made by Ralph McQuarrie. A) Starkiller Multimedia Source Page. B) The Star Wars Portfolio by Ralph McQuarrie. C) Titelman, Carol (ed.) (1994), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 66. D) Titelman, Carol (ed.) (1994), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 66. E) Starkiller Multimedia Source Page. F) Titelman, Carol (ed.) (1994), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 26. G) The Star Wars Home Page. H) Classic Star Wars: A New Hope #2 (1994), p. 33. I) Classic Star Wars: A New Hope #1 (1994), p. 62. J) The Star Wars Home Page. K) Classic Star Wars: A New Hope #1 (1994), p. 31. L) Titelman, Carol (ed.) (1994), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 56. M) Titelman, Carol (ed.) (1994), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 17. N) Titelman, Carol (ed.) (1994), The Art of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, p. 68. </p>

<p> Leia confesses her love for Han before Vader freezes him in carbonite to test whether the process will safely imprison Luke. Han survives and is given to Fett, who intends to collect his bounty from Jabba the Hutt. Lando frees Leia and Chewbacca, but they are too late to stop Fett's escape. The group fights its way back to the Falcon and flees the city. Luke arrives and engages Vader in a lightsaber duel over the city's central air shaft. Vader defeats Luke, severing his right hand and separating him from his lightsaber. He urges Luke to embrace the dark side and help him destroy his master, the Emperor, so they may rule the galaxy together. Luke refuses, citing Obi-Wan's claim that Vader killed his father, prompting Vader to reveal that he is Luke's father. Distraught, Luke plunges down the air shaft and is ejected beneath the floating city, latching onto an antenna. He reaches out through the Force to Leia, and the Falcon returns to rescue him. They are attacked by TIE fighters but narrowly evade capture by Vader's Star Destroyer when R2-D2 repairs the Falcon's hyperdrive and the vessel escapes. </p>

<p> Fox had the right of first negotiation and refusal to participate in any potential sequel. Negotiations began in mid-1977 between the studio and Lucas's representatives. Fox had already given Lucas controlling interest in the series' merchandising and sequels because it had thought Star Wars would be worthless.[40] Terms were agreed quickly for the sequel compared to the original, in part because Fox executive Alan Ladd Jr. had been supportive of the original and was eager for the sequel.[44] The 100-page contract was signed on September 21, 1977, dictating that Fox would distribute the film but have no creative input, in exchange for 50% of the gross profits on the first $20 million earned, with the percentage increasing to 77.5% in the producers' favor if it exceeded $100 million. Filming had to begin by January 1979 for release on May 1, 1980.[41][45] The deal offered the possibility of significant financial gain for Lucas, but he risked financial ruin if the sequel failed.[17][46] </p>

<p> Lucas considered replacing producer Gary Kurtz with Howard Kazanjian because Kurtz had not fulfilled his role and left problems unresolved while filming Star Wars. Kurtz convinced him otherwise by trading on his longtime loyalty to Lucas and knowledge of the Star Wars property.[51] Lucas took an executive producer role, enabling him to focus on his businesses and the development of Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981).[17][41][52] By late 1977, Kurtz began hiring key crew members, including production designer Norman Reynolds, consultant John Barry, makeup artist Stuart Freeborn, and first assistant director David Tomblin.[17][53] Lucas rehired artists Ralph McQuarrie and Joe Johnston to maintain visual consistency with Star Wars, and the three began conceptualizing the Hoth battle in December.[54] By this point, the budget had increased to $10 million.[55] Lucas wanted a director who would support the material and accept that he was ultimately in charge.[17] He considered around 100 directors, including Alan Parker and John Badham, before hiring his old acquaintance Irvin Kershner in February 1978.[17][56] Kershner was reluctant to direct the sequel to a film as successful as Star Wars, and his friends warned him against taking the job, believing he would be blamed if it failed.[17][57] Lucas convinced Kershner it was not so much a sequel as a chapter in a larger story; he also promised him he could make the film his own way.[57] </p>

<p> Between November 28 and December 2, 1977, Lucas and Brackett held a story conference.[35][62] Lucas had core ideas in mind but wanted Brackett to piece them together.[17][60] He envisioned one central plot complemented by three main subplots, set across 60 scenes, 100 script pages, and a two-hour runtime.[63] They formed a general outline and ideas that included the Wookiee homeworld, new alien species, the Galactic Emperor, a gambler from Han's past, water and city planets, Luke's lost twin sister, and a diminutive, froglike creature, Minch Yoda.[35][64][65] Lucas drew on influences including The Thing from Another World (1951), the novel Dune (1965), and the television series Flash Gordon (1954).[66] Around this time, Kurtz conceived the title The Empire Strikes Back.[f] He said they avoided calling it Star Wars II because films with "II" in their titles were seen as inferior.[41] </p>

<p> The strict schedule left Lucas no choice but to write the second draft himself.[17][61][70] Though Brackett's draft followed Lucas's outline, he found she had portrayed the characters differently than he intended.[71] Lucas completed his handwritten, 121-page draft on April 1. He found the process more enjoyable than on Star Wars because he was familiar with the universe, but struggled to write a satisfying conclusion, leaving it open for a third film.[72] This draft established Luke's sister as a new character undertaking a similar journey,[73] Vader's castle and his fear of the emperor,[74] distinct power levels in controlling the Force,[75] Yoda's unconventional speech pattern,[76] and bounty hunters, including Boba Fett. Lucas wrote Fett like the Man with No Name, combining him with an abandoned idea for a Super Stormtrooper.[77] Lucas's handwritten draft included mention of Vader being Luke's father, but the typed script omitted this revelation. Despite contradictory information in drafts that included the ghost of Luke's father, Lucas said he had always intended for Vader to be Luke's father and omitted it from scripts to avoid leaks.[17][78] Lucas included elements such as Han's debt to Jabba, and recontextualized Luke leaving Dagobah to rescue his friends: in Brackett's draft, Obi-Wan instructs Luke to leave; Lucas had Luke choose to do so. He also removed a scene of Luke massacring stormtroopers to convey him falling to the dark side, wanting to instead explore this in the next film.[70] Lucas believed it was important the characters be inspirational and appropriate for children.[79] His typed draft is titled Star Wars: Episode V The Empire Strikes Back.[76] </p>

<p> In June 1978, impressed with his work on Raiders of the Lost Ark, Lucas hired Lawrence Kasdan to refine the draft; Kasdan was paid $60,000.[17][61][80] In early July, Kasdan, Kershner and Lucas held a story conference to discuss Lucas's draft.[48][61] The group collaborated on ideas, with Lucas embracing their challenges and input.[17][81] Mandated to deliver a fifth of the script every other week, Kasdan began his rewrite, focusing on developing character relationships and psychologies; he completed the third draft by early August.[82] This version refined Minch Yoda—alternately named "the Critter", Minch, Buffy, and simply Yoda—from a slimy creature to a small blue one; each version retained the character's long life and wisdom.[17][35] Yoda was intended to teach Luke to respect everyone and not judge by appearances, and defy audience expectations.[17] The draft tightened or expanded dialogue to better pace action scenes, added more romance, and added or changed locations, such as moving a Vader scene from a spaceship deck to his private cubicle.[83] Lucas removed a line mentioning Lando deliberately abandoning his people, and had Luke contact Leia through the Force instead of Obi-Wan's ghost.[84] The fourth draft—mostly the same but with more detailed action—was submitted on October 24.[85] </p>

<p> David Prowse hesitated to return as Darth Vader because, as he was hidden behind a costume, he believed the role offered little job security; he returned after being told further delays would lead to his being replaced.[90] James Earl Jones returned to voice Vader but, as with Star Wars, declined a credit because he considered himself "special effects" to Prowse's physical performance. He earned $15,000 for half a day's work, plus a small percentage of the profits.[91][92] Anthony Daniels was reluctant to return as C-3PO because he had received little acknowledgment for his previous performance, as the filmmakers played down his involvement to portray the droid as a real being. He ultimately agreed, however, for an improved salary.[93] Alec Guinness said he could not return as Obi-Wan because his failing eyesight required him to avoid bright lights.[56] Recasting him was considered but, determined to recruit him, Lucas agreed to a deal in late August 1979 which gave him a more limited role. Guinness was paid 0.25% of Empire's box office gross for his few hours of work.[94] </p>

<p> Billy Dee Williams was cast as Lando Calrissian, making him the first black actor with a starring role in the series.[88][95] He found the character interesting because of his cape and Armenian surname; Williams believed this gave him room to develop the character. Williams said Lando was much like himself—a "pretty cool guy".[10] He believed it was a token role, but was assured it was not specifically written for a black actor.[96] Kershner said Williams had the fantastic charm of a "Mississippi riverboat hustler".[96] Howard Rollins, Terry Alexander, Robert Christian, Thurman Scott, and Yaphet Kotto were also considered for the part.[85][97] Yoda was voiced and puppeteered by Frank Oz, with assistance from Kathryn Mullen, David Barclay, and Wendy Froud.[98] Lucas had intended for a different actor to provide Yoda's voice, but decided it would be too difficult to cast someone who could match their voice to Oz's puppetry.[27] </p>

<p> Jeremy Bulloch did not audition for Boba Fett; he was hired because the costume fit him. It was uncomfortable and top-heavy, making it difficult to maintain his balance, and the mask often steamed up. Bulloch assumed his lines would be dubbed over, as he had little dialogue (Fett's voice actor, Jason Wingreen, remained uncredited until 2000).[99] Bulloch also appears as an Imperial officer who restrains Leia on Bespin. No other cast member was available for this role, so Kurtz had him quickly change out of the Fett costume to stand in. John Morton portrays Fett in the same scene.[g] There was no extensive casting for the Emperor. Lucas chose Clive Revill to provide the character's voice, and actress Marjorie Eaton physically portrayed the Emperor in test footage. The footage proved unsatisfactory, and special effects artist Rick Baker created a full mask that his wife Elaine wore. Chimpanzee eyes were superimposed over her face; cat eyes and assistant accountant Laura Crockett's eyes were also considered.[26][27][59] </p>

<p> Pre-production began in early 1978. Although Kershner wanted two years, this phase only lasted a year.[100] Seeking an area to represent the ice planet Hoth, location scouts considered Finland, Sweden, and the Arctic Circle. The location needed to be free of trees and near populated areas for amenities.[101] Kershner credited a Fox distribution employee with recommending Finse, Norway; Kurtz said it was Reynolds who had done so.[101] For the bog planet Dagobah, scouts looked at Central Africa, Kenya, and Scandinavia, but Lucas wanted to avoid shooting on location. He funded the construction of a "Star Wars stage" at Elstree Studios, London, for the Dagobah and rebel base sets. Construction for the stage—which measured 1,250,000 cubic feet (35,000 m3) and cost $2 million—began at the end of August.[41][102] Sets were the single biggest expense of the production, costing a total of $3.5 million. By December, the budget had increased to $21.5 million, more than double the original estimate.[103] Financial projections for The Chapter II Company suggested it would run a monthly deficit of $5–25 million by the end of 1979, including over $2 million in production costs and $400,000 to fund ILM.[85] </p>

<p> Filming the Hoth scenes on a set was considered, but ultimately rejected as inauthentic. The location filming coincided with the area's worst snowstorm in half a century, impeding the production with blizzards, 40-mile-per-hour (64 km/h) winds, and temperatures between −26 °F (−32 °C) and −38 °F (−39 °C).[i] The weather cleared only twice; some days, filming could not take place.[115] The frigid conditions made the acetate film brittle, camera lenses iced over, snow seeped into equipment, and effects paint froze inside the tin.[17][116] To counter these effects, lenses were kept cool but the camera body was warmed to protect the film, battery, and camera operators' hands.[117] The crew was outside for up to 11 hours at a time, being subjected to thin air, limited visibility, and mild frostbite; one crewman slipped and broke two ribs.[118] The difficult conditions led to strong camaraderie among crewmembers.[119] </p>

<p> Avalanches blocked direct transport links, and trenches dug by the crew quickly filled with snow. Scenes could be prepared only a few hours in advance and many scenes were filmed just outside the crew's hotel as the shifting weather regularly altered the scenery.[17][120] Although Fisher was not scheduled to film scenes in Norway, she joined Hamill on location because she wanted to observe the process.[87] Ford was not scheduled for the Finse phase, but to compensate for the delays, he was brought there instead of creating a separate set in a Leeds studio. On a few hours' notice, he arrived in Finse, having traveled the last 23 miles (37 km) of the snow-laden journey by snowplow.[121] Production returned to England after a week, though Hamill had an additional day of filming. The second unit remained in Norway through March to film explosions, incidental footage, and battle scenes featuring 35 mountain rescue skiers as extras. The skiers' work was compensated with a donation to the Norwegian Red Cross.[122] </p>

<p> To film the Imperial probe landing, eight sticks of dynamite were placed on the glacier and set to explode at sunrise, but the demolitions expert in charge knocked the battery out of his radio and received the message too late to capture the intended shot.[123] The opening sweeping shot of the area was captured by flying a helicopter to 15,000 feet (4,600 m) and performing a controlled drop at a rate of 30 miles per hour (48 km/h) or 2,500 feet (760 m) a minute.[124] A heated shelter for the helicopter had to be constructed, which delayed filming of the shot by four weeks.[125] The second unit, scheduled to be in Finse for three weeks, was there for eight.[124] When the crew returned to London, they had only half the planned footage, and background images for special effects shots were uneven.[17][114][126] Empire's budget increased to around $22 million because of the delays and having to rework scenes to compensate for the missing footage.[127] </p>

<p> The shoot was strenuous and mired in conflicts.[17][131] Fisher suffered from influenza and bronchitis, her weight dropped to 85 pounds (39 kg) while working 12-hour days, and she collapsed on set from an allergic reaction to steam or spray paint. She was also allergic to most makeup.[132] Her overuse of hallucinogens and painkillers worsened her condition, as did the anxiety she experienced while performing her speech to the rebels.[133] Stress and personal traumas led to frequent arguments among Hamill, Fisher, and Ford.[17][134] Ford and Hamill fell ill or were injured at different times.[135] Hamill was depressed by his isolation from human cast members, as his scenes required him to interact mostly with puppets, robots, and actors whose voices would be added later or dubbed over.[136][137] He was meant to use an earpiece to hear Oz's Yoda dialogue, but for various reasons this did not work, and he struggled to form a relationship with the character. The Dagobah set was liberally sprayed with mineral oil, which caused him physical discomfort for long periods. Hamill called it a "physical ordeal the whole time ... but I don't really mind that".[136] At one point, Oz cheered Hamill up with a Miss Piggy routine. Hamill recalled Ford giving him a kiss instead of reading his lines, which entertained the crew.[59] Mayhew fell ill while filming Han's torture scene because the set used bursts of steam, which raised the ambient temperature to 90 °F (32 °C) while he was wearing a wool suit.[138] </p>

<p> Bank of America representatives visited the set in late March, concerned about rising costs.[139] Lucas rarely visited the set, but arrived on May 6 after realizing the production was behind schedule and over budget.[41] An official Lucasfilm memo instructed staff to misstate the film's direct costs as $17 million.[140] At this point, Kurtz and Lucas estimated it would cost $25–28 million to complete filming.[127][140] Finances ran out in mid-July when Bank of America refused to increase the loan.[17][141] The crisis was kept from the crew, including Kershner, and tactics were used to delay its impact, including paying staff biweekly instead of weekly and Lucas borrowing money from his merchandising company Black Falcon.[141] Lucas worried he would have to sell Empire and its associated rights to Fox to sustain the project, losing his creative freedom. Fox was also threatening to buy out the bond and take over filming.[127][141] With about 20% of Empire left to film, Lucasfilm president Charles Weber arranged for Bank of Boston to refinance the loan to $31 million, including $27.7 million from Bank of Boston and $3 million guaranteed by Fox in exchange for an increased percentage of the theatrical returns and 10% of merchandising profits. Lucasfilm took out the loan, making the company directly liable.[17][127][142] </p>

<p> The Star Wars stage was completed in early May. It was too small to house the Rebel hangar and Dagobah sets, and an extension had to be funded and built. The producers mandated filming begin on the stage on May 18, regardless of its state.[143] The hangar scene involved 77 rebel extras, which cost £2,000 per day.[144] Around 50 short tons (45 long tons) of dendritic salt, mixed with magnesium sulfate for a sparkle effect, were used for the snowy sets; this combination of substances gave the cast and crew headaches.[145] Second unit director John Barry died suddenly in early June; Harley Cokeliss replaced him a week later.[65][146][147] The typical purpose of the second unit was to do time-consuming filming for special effects shots, but they were now filming main scenes—including Luke's ice cave imprisonment—because the schedule had overrun by around 26 days.[148] Hamill was unavailable for several days after injuring his hand during a stunt jump from a speeder bike. Having been called in for the stunt the same day his son was born, aggravated by the salt-laden setting, and exhausted, he angrily chastised Kurtz for not using a double for the scene.[149] Kershner's hands-on directing style, which included him acting out how he wanted a scene performed, agitated Hamill; Kershner, for his part, was frustrated that Hamill was not following his advice.[150] </p>

<p> Hamill returned in early July to film his climactic battle against Darth Vader, portrayed by stunt double Bob Anderson, who said the experience was like fighting blindfolded because of the costume. Hamill spent weeks practicing his fencing routine, eventually growing frustrated and refusing to continue.[155] The next scene, where Vader confesses he is Luke's father, was shrouded in secrecy. Prowse was given the line "Obi-Wan Kenobi is your father" to read because he was known for repeatedly leaking information.[17] Only Kershner, the producers, and Hamill knew the actual line.[17][156] While filming the scene, Hamill was positioned on a platform suspended 35 feet (11 m) above a pile of mattresses.[17] Footage of his fall into the reactor shaft was damaged during processing and the scene had to be reshot in early August.[157] The Vader confrontation took eight weeks to film. Hamill insisted on doing as many of his stunts as possible, though the insurers refused to allow him to perform a 15-foot (4.6 m) fall out of a window. He accidentally fell from a nine-inch ledge 40 feet (12 m) high but rolled on landing to avoid injury.[136] Lucas returned to the set on July 15 and stayed for the rest of filming.[141] He rewrote Luke's scenes on Dagobah, removing or trimming them so they could be shot in just over two weeks.[158] </p>

<p> Most of the cast completed filming by the start of August, including Ford, Fisher, Williams, Mayhew, and Daniels.[159] Hamill began filming on the Dagobah set with Yoda. They only had 12 days to film because Oz was scheduled for another project.[160] With the film now over 50 days behind schedule, Kurtz was removed from his role and replaced by Kazanjian and associate producer Robert Watts.[161] One of the last scenes shot was of Luke exploring the dark side tree on Dagobah. A wrap party was held on the set to mark the official conclusion of filming on September 5, 1979, after 133 days. Guinness filmed his scenes against a bluescreen the same day.[162][163] Kershner and the second unit continued filming additional footage, including Luke's X-Wing being raised from the swamp.[162] Kershner left the set on September 9, and Hamill finished 103 days of filming two days later.[127][164] The second unit finished filming on September 24 with Hamill's stunt double.[165][166] There was approximately 400,000 feet (120,000 m) of film, or 80 hours of footage.[167] </p>

<p> The final budget was $30.5 million.[vi][169] Kurtz blamed inflation, which had increased resource, cast, and crew costs significantly.[170] Lucas blamed Kurtz for lack of oversight and poor financial planning.[17][171] Watts said Kurtz was not good with people and never developed a working relationship with Kershner, making it difficult for him to temper the director's indulgences.[172] Kurtz had also given Kershner more leeway because of the delays caused by the Stage 3 fire.[140] Kershner's slower work pace had frustrated Lucas.[17][173] He described his filming style as frugal, performing two or three takes with little coverage film that could later compensate for mistakes. Watts and Reynolds said Kershner often looked at new ways of doing things, but this required planning that only delayed things further.[135] Kershner had tried replicating the quick pacing of Star Wars, not lingering on any scene for too long, and encouraged improvisation, modifying scenes and dialogue to focus more on characters' emotions, such as C-3PO interrupting Han and Leia as they are about to kiss.[17][174][175] Kazanjian said many mistakes were made but blamed Weber, Lucasfilm vice president John Moohr, and primarily Kurtz.[176] Actor John Morton called Kurtz an unsung hero, who brought his experience of filming war to Empire.[177] </p>

<p> The schedule overrun resulted in filming and post-production taking place simultaneously; filmed footage was shipped immediately to ILM to begin effects work.[178] A rough cut resembling the finished film (minus special effects) was put together by mid-October 1979.[179] Lucas provided 31 pages of notes about changes he wanted, mainly alterations in dialogue and scene lengths.[180] Jones recorded Vader's dialogue in late 1979 and early 1980.[181] In early 1980, Lucas changed the long-planned opening of Luke riding his tauntaun to a shot of the Star Destroyer launching probes. He continued tweaking elements to improve the special effects, but even with ILM staff working up to 24 hours a day, six days a week, there was not enough time to do everything they wanted.[182] A Dagobah pick-up scene, in which R2-D2 is spat out by a monster, was filmed in Lucas's swimming pool;[183] the Emperor's scenes were filmed in February 1980.[27] </p>

<p> In North America, Empire opened mid-week on May 21, leading into the extended Memorial Day holiday weekend.[213] The number of theaters was deliberately limited to 126 to make it difficult to get a ticket, thus generating more appeal—a strategy used with films expected to receive positive word of mouth.[185] The film earned $1.3 million during its opening day—an average of $10,581 per theater.[214] It garnered a further $4.9 million during the weekend and $1.5 million during the Monday holiday, for a total of $6.4 million—an average of $50,919 per theater. This made Empire the number one film of the weekend, ahead of the counterprogrammed debuts of the comedy The Gong Show Movie ($1.5 million) and The Shining ($600,000).[213][215][216] By the end of its first week, the film had earned $9.6 million—a 60% increase over Star Wars—averaging $76,201 per theater, the highest-ever figure for a film in over 100 theaters.[185][217][218] </p>

<p> It remained number one until its fourth weekend, when it fell to third with $3.6 million, behind the spoof comedy Wholly Moses! ($3.62 million) and the Western Bronco Billy ($3.7 million).[214][219] It regained the number one position in its fifth weekend, expanding its theater count to 823 and earning $10.8 million.[214][220] Combined with its weekday gross, Empire garnered a single-week gross of approximately $20 million, a box office record the film would hold until Superman II's $24 million the following year.[221][222][223] It remained number one for the next seven weeks, before falling to number two in its thirteenth week with $4.3 million, behind the debuting Smokey and the Bandit II ($10.9 million). Detailed box office tracking is unavailable for the rest of Empire's 32-week, 1,278-theater total run.[214][224] </p>

<p> Empire earned between $181.4–209.4 million in its initial North American release, making it the highest-grossing film of the year, ahead of the comedy films 9 to 5 ($103.3 million), Stir Crazy ($101.3 million), and Airplane! ($83.5 million).[196][225][226] Although it earned less than the $221.3 million of Star Wars, Empire was considered a financial success. Industry experts estimated the film returned $120 million to the filmmakers,[173][196][226] which recouped Lucas's investment and cleared his debt;[227] he paid out $5 million in employee bonuses.[174] Box office figures are unavailable for all the releases outside of North America in 1980, although The New York Times reported the film performed well in the United Kingdom and Japan. According to Variety, Empire earned approximately $192.1 million, giving the film a cumulative worldwide gross of $401.5 million[vii], making it the highest-grossing film of the year.[1][2][3] Empire did not achieve the same success as Star Wars, which Lucas blamed on its inconclusive ending.[173][229] </p>

<p> Some critics believed The Empire Strikes Back was a good film but not as enjoyable as Star Wars.[239][240][241] They believed the tonal shift featuring darker material and more mature story lines detracted from the charm, fun, and comic silliness of the original.[239][241][242] The Wall Street Journal's Joy Gould Boyum believed it was "absurd" to add dramatic weight to the lighthearted Star Wars, stripping it of its innocence. Writing for The Washington Post, Gary Arnold found the darker undercurrents and greater narrative scale interesting because it created more dramatic threads to explore.[243][241] The New Yorker's David Denby argued it was more spectacular than the original, but lacked its camp style.[242] The Hollywood Reporter's Arthur Knight believed the novelty of the original and the plethora of space opera films produced since made Empire seem derivative; even so, he called it the best in the genre since Star Wars.[240][243] Writing for Time, Gerald Clarke said Empire surpassed Star Wars in several ways, including being more visually and artistically interesting.[244] The New York Times's Vincent Canby called it a more mechanical, less suspenseful experience.[239] </p>

<p> Writing for the Los Angeles Times, Charles Champlin said the inconclusive ending cleverly completed the narrative while serving as a cliffhanger, but Clarke called it a "not very satisfying" conclusion.[245][246] Canby and the Chicago Reader's Dave Kehr believed that as the middle film, it should have focused on narrative development instead of exposition, finding little narrative progression between the film's beginning and end.[239][247][241] The Washington Post's Judith Martin labeled it a "good junk" film, enjoyable but fleeting, because it lacked a stand-alone narrative.[248] Knight and Clarke found the story sometimes difficult to follow—Knight because the third act jumped between separate storylines, and Clarke because he missed important information in the fast-paced plot.[240][246] Kehr and Sight & Sound's Richard Combs wrote that characterization seemed to be less important than special effects, visual spectacle and action set pieces that accomplished little narratively.[247][249] </p>

<p> Reviews were mixed for the principal cast.[241][245][247] Knight wrote that Kershner's direction made the characters more human and less archetypal.[240] Hamill, Fisher, and Ford received some praise, with Champlin calling Hamill "youthfully innocent" and engaging, and Fisher independent.[240][245][250] Arnold described the character progression as less about development and more about "finesse", with little change taking place,[243] while Kehr felt the characters were "stiffer" without Lucas's direction.[247] Knight called Guinness's performance half-hearted,[240] and Janet Maslin criticized Lando Calrissian, the only major black character in the film, as "exaggeratedly unctuous, untrustworthy and loaded with jive".[251] The Chicago Tribune's Gene Siskel said the non-human characters, including the robots and Chewbacca, remained the most lovable creatures, with Yoda being the film's highlight.[252] Knight, Gould Boyum, and Arnold thought Yoda to be incredibly lifelike; Arnold considered his expressions so realistic that he believed an actor's face had been composited onto the puppet.[240][241][243] Canby called the human cast bland and nondescript, and said even the robot characters offered diminishing enjoyment, but Yoda was a success when used sparingly.[239] </p>

<p> Although Arnold praised Kershner's direction, others believed that Lucas's oversight was obvious and Empire lacked Kershner's established directorial sensibilities. Denby described his work as "impersonal" and Canby believed it was impossible to identify what Kershner had contributed.[239][242][243] Combs believed Kershner was an "ill-advised" director because he emphasized the characters, and the result was common tropes at the expense of the comic-strip pace of Star Wars.[249] Peter Suschitzky's cinematography was praised for its visuals and bold color choices,[240][243] and the special effects were lauded as "breathtaking",[241] "ingenious",[240] and visually dazzling.[243] Jim Harwood said he was let down only by the familiarity of the effects from the original, which were emulated by other films.[250] Champlin appreciated that the effects were used to enhance scenes rather than being the focus.[245] </p>

<p> Since their initial release, the Special Editions have been altered multiple times. For the 2004 rerelease, the Clive Revill/Elaine Baker Emperor was replaced by Ian McDiarmid, who had performed the role since Return of the Jedi (1983).[260] Temuera Morrison, who portrayed Fett's clone predecessor in Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), dubbed over Wingreen's lines.[99] Minor changes were made for the 2011 Blu-ray release, including adding flames to the probe droid's impact crater and color modifications.[264][265] The Special Edition releases were controversial with fans, who considered the changes to the original films unnecessary or too substantial.[260][266] The unaltered versions have been commercially unavailable since a 2006 DVD release, which used unrestored footage from an early 1990s Laserdisc release. Harmy's Despecialized Edition is an unofficial fan effort to preserve the unaltered films.[267][268] The 2010 documentary The People vs. George Lucas documents the relationship between the films, their fans, and Lucas.[269] </p>

<p> Lancashire believed that Luke's impatience to leave for Bespin exemplifies his lack of growth from his training.[305] There, Vader tempts him with the power of the dark side and the revelation that he is Luke's father.[285][297] Vader wants Luke's help to destroy the Emperor, not for good, but so that Vader can impose his own order over the galaxy.[285] This admission robs Luke of the idealized image of his Jedi father, reveals Obi-Wan's deception in hiding his parentage, and takes the last of his innocence.[302][309][310] Gerald Clarke suggests Luke is not strong or virtuous enough to resist Vader during this confrontation, and so allows himself to fall into the airshaft below, showing the antagonist does sometimes win.[297][302] The concept of a character having a good father and an evil father is a common story trope because of its simple representations of good and evil.[285] At the film's finale, Luke has a greater understanding of the relationship between good and evil, and the dual nature of people.[311] </p>

<p> Despite the film's initial mixed reception, it has since been reevaluated by critics and fans and is now often considered the best film in the Star Wars series, and one of the greatest films ever made.[m] In 2014, members of the entertainment industry ranked Empire as the 32nd-best film of all time in a poll conducted by The Hollywood Reporter (Star Wars was #11).[327] Empire magazine named it the third-best film of all time, stating that the modern cliché of sequels employing a darker tone can be traced back to Empire.[319] A 1997 retrospective review by Roger Ebert declared the film the best of the original trilogy, praising the depth of its storytelling and its ability to create a sense of wonder in the audience.[328] A vote by 250,000 Business Insider readers in 2014 listed it as the greatest film ever made; it is also included in the 2013 film reference book 1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die.[329][330] The revelation that Vader is Luke's father continues to be seen as one of the greatest plot twists in cinema.[n] Similarly, Han saying "I know" in response to Leia's love confession is considered one of the most iconic scenes in the Star Wars films and one of the more famous lines of improvised dialogue in cinema.[o] </p>

<p> Empire magazine selected the film as the sixth greatest movie sequel, lauding the "bold" unresolved ending and willingness to avoid the same formula as the first film.[342] Den of Geek called it the second-best sequel—after Aliens (1986)—and hailed it as Lucas's "masterpiece".[317] Playboy named it the third-best sequel, describing the disclosure of the relationship between Luke and Vader as the "emotional core that has elevated Star Wars to the pantheon of timeless modern sagas".[318] The BBC and Collider listed it as one of the best sequels ever made,[343][344] while Time and Playboy described it as a sequel that surpasses the original.[318][345] Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes recognizes it as the 27th-best sequel, based on review scores.[346] Rolling Stone's 2014 reader-voted list of the best sequels listed Empire at third.[347] </p>

<p> Landon Palmer, Eric Diaz, and Darren Mooney argue that Empire, and not Star Wars, created the concept of the modern blockbuster film franchise, which includes sequels serving as chapters in an infinitely expanding narrative—a template which was embraced by other film properties in the decades following Empire's release. This new paradigm stood in opposition to the popular trend of exploiting a successful film by creating low-budget sequels (which resulted in diminishing returns, as happened with the Jaws franchise).[365][366][367] Instead, more money was spent on Empire to expand the fictional universe and reap greater box-office returns. The use of a cliffhanger ending to set up a future sequel is seen in many modern films, particularly those in the MCU.[365] It has also been suggested that Empire forged a narrative structure that continues to be emulated in trilogies, wherein the middle film is darker than the original and features an ending in which the protagonists fail to defeat the antagonists (which sets up a subsequent film). Emmet Asher-Perrin and Ben Sherlock cite the series Back to the Future, The Matrix, The Lord of the Rings, and Pirates of the Caribbean as examples.[368][369] </p>

<p> Leia confesses her love for Han before Vader freezes him in carbonite to test whether the process will safely imprison Luke. Han survives and is given to Fett, who intends to collect his bounty from Jabba the Hutt. Lando frees Leia and Chewbacca, but they are too late to stop Fett's escape. The group fights its way back to the Falcon and flees the city. Luke arrives and engages Vader in a lightsaber duel over the city's central air shaft. Vader defeats Luke, severing his right hand and separating him from his lightsaber. He urges Luke to embrace the dark side and help him destroy his master, the Emperor, so they may rule the galaxy together. Luke refuses, citing Obi-Wan's claim that Vader killed his father, prompting Vader to reveal that he is Luke's father. Distraught, Luke plunges down the air shaft and is ejected beneath the floating city, latching onto an antenna. He reaches out through the Force to Leia, and the Falcon returns to rescue him. They are attacked by TIE fighters but narrowly evade capture by Vader's Star Destroyer when R2-D2 repairs the Falcon's hyperdrive and the vessel escapes. </p>

<p> Fox had the right of first negotiation and refusal to participate in any potential sequel. Negotiations began in mid-1977 between the studio and Lucas's representatives. Fox had already given Lucas controlling interest in the series' merchandising and sequels because it had thought Star Wars would be worthless.[40] Terms were agreed quickly for the sequel compared to the original, in part because Fox executive Alan Ladd Jr. had been supportive of the original and was eager for the sequel.[44] The 100-page contract was signed on September 21, 1977, dictating that Fox would distribute the film but have no creative input, in exchange for 50% of the gross profits on the first $20 million earned, with the percentage increasing to 77.5% in the producers' favor if it exceeded $100 million. Filming had to begin by January 1979 for release on May 1, 1980.[41][45] The deal offered the possibility of significant financial gain for Lucas, but he risked financial ruin if the sequel failed.[17][46] </p>

<p> Lucas considered replacing producer Gary Kurtz with Howard Kazanjian because Kurtz had not fulfilled his role and left problems unresolved while filming Star Wars. Kurtz convinced him otherwise by trading on his longtime loyalty to Lucas and knowledge of the Star Wars property.[51] Lucas took an executive producer role, enabling him to focus on his businesses and the development of Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981).[17][41][52] By late 1977, Kurtz began hiring key crew members, including production designer Norman Reynolds, consultant John Barry, makeup artist Stuart Freeborn, and first assistant director David Tomblin.[17][53] Lucas rehired artists Ralph McQuarrie and Joe Johnston to maintain visual consistency with Star Wars, and the three began conceptualizing the Hoth battle in December.[54] By this point, the budget had increased to $10 million.[55] Lucas wanted a director who would support the material and accept that he was ultimately in charge.[17] He considered around 100 directors, including Alan Parker and John Badham, before hiring his old acquaintance Irvin Kershner in February 1978.[17][56] Kershner was reluctant to direct the sequel to a film as successful as Star Wars, and his friends warned him against taking the job, believing he would be blamed if it failed.[17][57] Lucas convinced Kershner it was not so much a sequel as a chapter in a larger story; he also promised him he could make the film his own way.[57] </p>

<p> Between November 28 and December 2, 1977, Lucas and Brackett held a story conference.[35][62] Lucas had core ideas in mind but wanted Brackett to piece them together.[17][60] He envisioned one central plot complemented by three main subplots, set across 60 scenes, 100 script pages, and a two-hour runtime.[63] They formed a general outline and ideas that included the Wookiee homeworld, new alien species, the Galactic Emperor, a gambler from Han's past, water and city planets, Luke's lost twin sister, and a diminutive, froglike creature, Minch Yoda.[35][64][65] Lucas drew on influences including The Thing from Another World (1951), the novel Dune (1965), and the television series Flash Gordon (1954).[66] Around this time, Kurtz conceived the title The Empire Strikes Back.[f] He said they avoided calling it Star Wars II because films with "II" in their titles were seen as inferior.[41] </p>

<p> The strict schedule left Lucas no choice but to write the second draft himself.[17][61][70] Though Brackett's draft followed Lucas's outline, he found she had portrayed the characters differently than he intended.[71] Lucas completed his handwritten, 121-page draft on April 1. He found the process more enjoyable than on Star Wars because he was familiar with the universe, but struggled to write a satisfying conclusion, leaving it open for a third film.[72] This draft established Luke's sister as a new character undertaking a similar journey,[73] Vader's castle and his fear of the emperor,[74] distinct power levels in controlling the Force,[75] Yoda's unconventional speech pattern,[76] and bounty hunters, including Boba Fett. Lucas wrote Fett like the Man with No Name, combining him with an abandoned idea for a Super Stormtrooper.[77] Lucas's handwritten draft included mention of Vader being Luke's father, but the typed script omitted this revelation. Despite contradictory information in drafts that included the ghost of Luke's father, Lucas said he had always intended for Vader to be Luke's father and omitted it from scripts to avoid leaks.[17][78] Lucas included elements such as Han's debt to Jabba, and recontextualized Luke leaving Dagobah to rescue his friends: in Brackett's draft, Obi-Wan instructs Luke to leave; Lucas had Luke choose to do so. He also removed a scene of Luke massacring stormtroopers to convey him falling to the dark side, wanting to instead explore this in the next film.[70] Lucas believed it was important the characters be inspirational and appropriate for children.[79] His typed draft is titled Star Wars: Episode V The Empire Strikes Back.[76] </p>

<p> In June 1978, impressed with his work on Raiders of the Lost Ark, Lucas hired Lawrence Kasdan to refine the draft; Kasdan was paid $60,000.[17][61][80] In early July, Kasdan, Kershner and Lucas held a story conference to discuss Lucas's draft.[48][61] The group collaborated on ideas, with Lucas embracing their challenges and input.[17][81] Mandated to deliver a fifth of the script every other week, Kasdan began his rewrite, focusing on developing character relationships and psychologies; he completed the third draft by early August.[82] This version refined Minch Yoda—alternately named "the Critter", Minch, Buffy, and simply Yoda—from a slimy creature to a small blue one; each version retained the character's long life and wisdom.[17][35] Yoda was intended to teach Luke to respect everyone and not judge by appearances, and defy audience expectations.[17] The draft tightened or expanded dialogue to better pace action scenes, added more romance, and added or changed locations, such as moving a Vader scene from a spaceship deck to his private cubicle.[83] Lucas removed a line mentioning Lando deliberately abandoning his people, and had Luke contact Leia through the Force instead of Obi-Wan's ghost.[84] The fourth draft—mostly the same but with more detailed action—was submitted on October 24.[85] </p>

<p> David Prowse hesitated to return as Darth Vader because, as he was hidden behind a costume, he believed the role offered little job security; he returned after being told further delays would lead to his being replaced.[90] James Earl Jones returned to voice Vader but, as with Star Wars, declined a credit because he considered himself "special effects" to Prowse's physical performance. He earned $15,000 for half a day's work, plus a small percentage of the profits.[91][92] Anthony Daniels was reluctant to return as C-3PO because he had received little acknowledgment for his previous performance, as the filmmakers played down his involvement to portray the droid as a real being. He ultimately agreed, however, for an improved salary.[93] Alec Guinness said he could not return as Obi-Wan because his failing eyesight required him to avoid bright lights.[56] Recasting him was considered but, determined to recruit him, Lucas agreed to a deal in late August 1979 which gave him a more limited role. Guinness was paid 0.25% of Empire's box office gross for his few hours of work.[94] </p>

<p> Billy Dee Williams was cast as Lando Calrissian, making him the first black actor with a starring role in the series.[88][95] He found the character interesting because of his cape and Armenian surname; Williams believed this gave him room to develop the character. Williams said Lando was much like himself—a "pretty cool guy".[10] He believed it was a token role, but was assured it was not specifically written for a black actor.[96] Kershner said Williams had the fantastic charm of a "Mississippi riverboat hustler".[96] Howard Rollins, Terry Alexander, Robert Christian, Thurman Scott, and Yaphet Kotto were also considered for the part.[85][97] Yoda was voiced and puppeteered by Frank Oz, with assistance from Kathryn Mullen, David Barclay, and Wendy Froud.[98] Lucas had intended for a different actor to provide Yoda's voice, but decided it would be too difficult to cast someone who could match their voice to Oz's puppetry.[27] </p>

<p> Jeremy Bulloch did not audition for Boba Fett; he was hired because the costume fit him. It was uncomfortable and top-heavy, making it difficult to maintain his balance, and the mask often steamed up. Bulloch assumed his lines would be dubbed over, as he had little dialogue (Fett's voice actor, Jason Wingreen, remained uncredited until 2000).[99] Bulloch also appears as an Imperial officer who restrains Leia on Bespin. No other cast member was available for this role, so Kurtz had him quickly change out of the Fett costume to stand in. John Morton portrays Fett in the same scene.[g] There was no extensive casting for the Emperor. Lucas chose Clive Revill to provide the character's voice, and actress Marjorie Eaton physically portrayed the Emperor in test footage. The footage proved unsatisfactory, and special effects artist Rick Baker created a full mask that his wife Elaine wore. Chimpanzee eyes were superimposed over her face; cat eyes and assistant accountant Laura Crockett's eyes were also considered.[26][27][59] </p>

<p> Pre-production began in early 1978. Although Kershner wanted two years, this phase only lasted a year.[100] Seeking an area to represent the ice planet Hoth, location scouts considered Finland, Sweden, and the Arctic Circle. The location needed to be free of trees and near populated areas for amenities.[101] Kershner credited a Fox distribution employee with recommending Finse, Norway; Kurtz said it was Reynolds who had done so.[101] For the bog planet Dagobah, scouts looked at Central Africa, Kenya, and Scandinavia, but Lucas wanted to avoid shooting on location. He funded the construction of a "Star Wars stage" at Elstree Studios, London, for the Dagobah and rebel base sets. Construction for the stage—which measured 1,250,000 cubic feet (35,000 m3) and cost $2 million—began at the end of August.[41][102] Sets were the single biggest expense of the production, costing a total of $3.5 million. By December, the budget had increased to $21.5 million, more than double the original estimate.[103] Financial projections for The Chapter II Company suggested it would run a monthly deficit of $5–25 million by the end of 1979, including over $2 million in production costs and $400,000 to fund ILM.[85] </p>

<p> Filming the Hoth scenes on a set was considered, but ultimately rejected as inauthentic. The location filming coincided with the area's worst snowstorm in half a century, impeding the production with blizzards, 40-mile-per-hour (64 km/h) winds, and temperatures between −26 °F (−32 °C) and −38 °F (−39 °C).[i] The weather cleared only twice; some days, filming could not take place.[115] The frigid conditions made the acetate film brittle, camera lenses iced over, snow seeped into equipment, and effects paint froze inside the tin.[17][116] To counter these effects, lenses were kept cool but the camera body was warmed to protect the film, battery, and camera operators' hands.[117] The crew was outside for up to 11 hours at a time, being subjected to thin air, limited visibility, and mild frostbite; one crewman slipped and broke two ribs.[118] The difficult conditions led to strong camaraderie among crewmembers.[119] </p>

<p> Avalanches blocked direct transport links, and trenches dug by the crew quickly filled with snow. Scenes could be prepared only a few hours in advance and many scenes were filmed just outside the crew's hotel as the shifting weather regularly altered the scenery.[17][120] Although Fisher was not scheduled to film scenes in Norway, she joined Hamill on location because she wanted to observe the process.[87] Ford was not scheduled for the Finse phase, but to compensate for the delays, he was brought there instead of creating a separate set in a Leeds studio. On a few hours' notice, he arrived in Finse, having traveled the last 23 miles (37 km) of the snow-laden journey by snowplow.[121] Production returned to England after a week, though Hamill had an additional day of filming. The second unit remained in Norway through March to film explosions, incidental footage, and battle scenes featuring 35 mountain rescue skiers as extras. The skiers' work was compensated with a donation to the Norwegian Red Cross.[122] </p>

<p> To film the Imperial probe landing, eight sticks of dynamite were placed on the glacier and set to explode at sunrise, but the demolitions expert in charge knocked the battery out of his radio and received the message too late to capture the intended shot.[123] The opening sweeping shot of the area was captured by flying a helicopter to 15,000 feet (4,600 m) and performing a controlled drop at a rate of 30 miles per hour (48 km/h) or 2,500 feet (760 m) a minute.[124] A heated shelter for the helicopter had to be constructed, which delayed filming of the shot by four weeks.[125] The second unit, scheduled to be in Finse for three weeks, was there for eight.[124] When the crew returned to London, they had only half the planned footage, and background images for special effects shots were uneven.[17][114][126] Empire's budget increased to around $22 million because of the delays and having to rework scenes to compensate for the missing footage.[127] </p>

<p> The shoot was strenuous and mired in conflicts.[17][131] Fisher suffered from influenza and bronchitis, her weight dropped to 85 pounds (39 kg) while working 12-hour days, and she collapsed on set from an allergic reaction to steam or spray paint. She was also allergic to most makeup.[132] Her overuse of hallucinogens and painkillers worsened her condition, as did the anxiety she experienced while performing her speech to the rebels.[133] Stress and personal traumas led to frequent arguments among Hamill, Fisher, and Ford.[17][134] Ford and Hamill fell ill or were injured at different times.[135] Hamill was depressed by his isolation from human cast members, as his scenes required him to interact mostly with puppets, robots, and actors whose voices would be added later or dubbed over.[136][137] He was meant to use an earpiece to hear Oz's Yoda dialogue, but for various reasons this did not work, and he struggled to form a relationship with the character. The Dagobah set was liberally sprayed with mineral oil, which caused him physical discomfort for long periods. Hamill called it a "physical ordeal the whole time ... but I don't really mind that".[136] At one point, Oz cheered Hamill up with a Miss Piggy routine. Hamill recalled Ford giving him a kiss instead of reading his lines, which entertained the crew.[59] Mayhew fell ill while filming Han's torture scene because the set used bursts of steam, which raised the ambient temperature to 90 °F (32 °C) while he was wearing a wool suit.[138] </p>

<p> Bank of America representatives visited the set in late March, concerned about rising costs.[139] Lucas rarely visited the set, but arrived on May 6 after realizing the production was behind schedule and over budget.[41] An official Lucasfilm memo instructed staff to misstate the film's direct costs as $17 million.[140] At this point, Kurtz and Lucas estimated it would cost $25–28 million to complete filming.[127][140] Finances ran out in mid-July when Bank of America refused to increase the loan.[17][141] The crisis was kept from the crew, including Kershner, and tactics were used to delay its impact, including paying staff biweekly instead of weekly and Lucas borrowing money from his merchandising company Black Falcon.[141] Lucas worried he would have to sell Empire and its associated rights to Fox to sustain the project, losing his creative freedom. Fox was also threatening to buy out the bond and take over filming.[127][141] With about 20% of Empire left to film, Lucasfilm president Charles Weber arranged for Bank of Boston to refinance the loan to $31 million, including $27.7 million from Bank of Boston and $3 million guaranteed by Fox in exchange for an increased percentage of the theatrical returns and 10% of merchandising profits. Lucasfilm took out the loan, making the company directly liable.[17][127][142] </p>

<p> The Star Wars stage was completed in early May. It was too small to house the Rebel hangar and Dagobah sets, and an extension had to be funded and built. The producers mandated filming begin on the stage on May 18, regardless of its state.[143] The hangar scene involved 77 rebel extras, which cost £2,000 per day.[144] Around 50 short tons (45 long tons) of dendritic salt, mixed with magnesium sulfate for a sparkle effect, were used for the snowy sets; this combination of substances gave the cast and crew headaches.[145] Second unit director John Barry died suddenly in early June; Harley Cokeliss replaced him a week later.[65][146][147] The typical purpose of the second unit was to do time-consuming filming for special effects shots, but they were now filming main scenes—including Luke's ice cave imprisonment—because the schedule had overrun by around 26 days.[148] Hamill was unavailable for several days after injuring his hand during a stunt jump from a speeder bike. Having been called in for the stunt the same day his son was born, aggravated by the salt-laden setting, and exhausted, he angrily chastised Kurtz for not using a double for the scene.[149] Kershner's hands-on directing style, which included him acting out how he wanted a scene performed, agitated Hamill; Kershner, for his part, was frustrated that Hamill was not following his advice.[150] </p>

<p> Hamill returned in early July to film his climactic battle against Darth Vader, portrayed by stunt double Bob Anderson, who said the experience was like fighting blindfolded because of the costume. Hamill spent weeks practicing his fencing routine, eventually growing frustrated and refusing to continue.[155] The next scene, where Vader confesses he is Luke's father, was shrouded in secrecy. Prowse was given the line "Obi-Wan Kenobi is your father" to read because he was known for repeatedly leaking information.[17] Only Kershner, the producers, and Hamill knew the actual line.[17][156] While filming the scene, Hamill was positioned on a platform suspended 35 feet (11 m) above a pile of mattresses.[17] Footage of his fall into the reactor shaft was damaged during processing and the scene had to be reshot in early August.[157] The Vader confrontation took eight weeks to film. Hamill insisted on doing as many of his stunts as possible, though the insurers refused to allow him to perform a 15-foot (4.6 m) fall out of a window. He accidentally fell from a nine-inch ledge 40 feet (12 m) high but rolled on landing to avoid injury.[136] Lucas returned to the set on July 15 and stayed for the rest of filming.[141] He rewrote Luke's scenes on Dagobah, removing or trimming them so they could be shot in just over two weeks.[158] </p>

<p> Most of the cast completed filming by the start of August, including Ford, Fisher, Williams, Mayhew, and Daniels.[159] Hamill began filming on the Dagobah set with Yoda. They only had 12 days to film because Oz was scheduled for another project.[160] With the film now over 50 days behind schedule, Kurtz was removed from his role and replaced by Kazanjian and associate producer Robert Watts.[161] One of the last scenes shot was of Luke exploring the dark side tree on Dagobah. A wrap party was held on the set to mark the official conclusion of filming on September 5, 1979, after 133 days. Guinness filmed his scenes against a bluescreen the same day.[162][163] Kershner and the second unit continued filming additional footage, including Luke's X-Wing being raised from the swamp.[162] Kershner left the set on September 9, and Hamill finished 103 days of filming two days later.[127][164] The second unit finished filming on September 24 with Hamill's stunt double.[165][166] There was approximately 400,000 feet (120,000 m) of film, or 80 hours of footage.[167] </p>

<p> The final budget was $30.5 million.[vi][169] Kurtz blamed inflation, which had increased resource, cast, and crew costs significantly.[170] Lucas blamed Kurtz for lack of oversight and poor financial planning.[17][171] Watts said Kurtz was not good with people and never developed a working relationship with Kershner, making it difficult for him to temper the director's indulgences.[172] Kurtz had also given Kershner more leeway because of the delays caused by the Stage 3 fire.[140] Kershner's slower work pace had frustrated Lucas.[17][173] He described his filming style as frugal, performing two or three takes with little coverage film that could later compensate for mistakes. Watts and Reynolds said Kershner often looked at new ways of doing things, but this required planning that only delayed things further.[135] Kershner had tried replicating the quick pacing of Star Wars, not lingering on any scene for too long, and encouraged improvisation, modifying scenes and dialogue to focus more on characters' emotions, such as C-3PO interrupting Han and Leia as they are about to kiss.[17][174][175] Kazanjian said many mistakes were made but blamed Weber, Lucasfilm vice president John Moohr, and primarily Kurtz.[176] Actor John Morton called Kurtz an unsung hero, who brought his experience of filming war to Empire.[177] </p>

<p> The schedule overrun resulted in filming and post-production taking place simultaneously; filmed footage was shipped immediately to ILM to begin effects work.[178] A rough cut resembling the finished film (minus special effects) was put together by mid-October 1979.[179] Lucas provided 31 pages of notes about changes he wanted, mainly alterations in dialogue and scene lengths.[180] Jones recorded Vader's dialogue in late 1979 and early 1980.[181] In early 1980, Lucas changed the long-planned opening of Luke riding his tauntaun to a shot of the Star Destroyer launching probes. He continued tweaking elements to improve the special effects, but even with ILM staff working up to 24 hours a day, six days a week, there was not enough time to do everything they wanted.[182] A Dagobah pick-up scene, in which R2-D2 is spat out by a monster, was filmed in Lucas's swimming pool;[183] the Emperor's scenes were filmed in February 1980.[27] </p>

<p> In North America, Empire opened mid-week on May 21, leading into the extended Memorial Day holiday weekend.[213] The number of theaters was deliberately limited to 126 to make it difficult to get a ticket, thus generating more appeal—a strategy used with films expected to receive positive word of mouth.[185] The film earned $1.3 million during its opening day—an average of $10,581 per theater.[214] It garnered a further $4.9 million during the weekend and $1.5 million during the Monday holiday, for a total of $6.4 million—an average of $50,919 per theater. This made Empire the number one film of the weekend, ahead of the counterprogrammed debuts of the comedy The Gong Show Movie ($1.5 million) and The Shining ($600,000).[213][215][216] By the end of its first week, the film had earned $9.6 million—a 60% increase over Star Wars—averaging $76,201 per theater, the highest-ever figure for a film in over 100 theaters.[185][217][218] </p>

<p> It remained number one until its fourth weekend, when it fell to third with $3.6 million, behind the spoof comedy Wholly Moses! ($3.62 million) and the Western Bronco Billy ($3.7 million).[214][219] It regained the number one position in its fifth weekend, expanding its theater count to 823 and earning $10.8 million.[214][220] Combined with its weekday gross, Empire garnered a single-week gross of approximately $20 million, a box office record the film would hold until Superman II's $24 million the following year.[221][222][223] It remained number one for the next seven weeks, before falling to number two in its thirteenth week with $4.3 million, behind the debuting Smokey and the Bandit II ($10.9 million). Detailed box office tracking is unavailable for the rest of Empire's 32-week, 1,278-theater total run.[214][224] </p>

<p> Empire earned between $181.4–209.4 million in its initial North American release, making it the highest-grossing film of the year, ahead of the comedy films 9 to 5 ($103.3 million), Stir Crazy ($101.3 million), and Airplane! ($83.5 million).[196][225][226] Although it earned less than the $221.3 million of Star Wars, Empire was considered a financial success. Industry experts estimated the film returned $120 million to the filmmakers,[173][196][226] which recouped Lucas's investment and cleared his debt;[227] he paid out $5 million in employee bonuses.[174] Box office figures are unavailable for all the releases outside of North America in 1980, although The New York Times reported the film performed well in the United Kingdom and Japan. According to Variety, Empire earned approximately $192.1 million, giving the film a cumulative worldwide gross of $401.5 million[vii], making it the highest-grossing film of the year.[1][2][3] Empire did not achieve the same success as Star Wars, which Lucas blamed on its inconclusive ending.[173][229] </p>

<p> Some critics believed The Empire Strikes Back was a good film but not as enjoyable as Star Wars.[239][240][241] They believed the tonal shift featuring darker material and more mature story lines detracted from the charm, fun, and comic silliness of the original.[239][241][242] The Wall Street Journal's Joy Gould Boyum believed it was "absurd" to add dramatic weight to the lighthearted Star Wars, stripping it of its innocence. Writing for The Washington Post, Gary Arnold found the darker undercurrents and greater narrative scale interesting because it created more dramatic threads to explore.[243][241] The New Yorker's David Denby argued it was more spectacular than the original, but lacked its camp style.[242] The Hollywood Reporter's Arthur Knight believed the novelty of the original and the plethora of space opera films produced since made Empire seem derivative; even so, he called it the best in the genre since Star Wars.[240][243] Writing for Time, Gerald Clarke said Empire surpassed Star Wars in several ways, including being more visually and artistically interesting.[244] The New York Times's Vincent Canby called it a more mechanical, less suspenseful experience.[239] </p>

<p> Writing for the Los Angeles Times, Charles Champlin said the inconclusive ending cleverly completed the narrative while serving as a cliffhanger, but Clarke called it a "not very satisfying" conclusion.[245][246] Canby and the Chicago Reader's Dave Kehr believed that as the middle film, it should have focused on narrative development instead of exposition, finding little narrative progression between the film's beginning and end.[239][247][241] The Washington Post's Judith Martin labeled it a "good junk" film, enjoyable but fleeting, because it lacked a stand-alone narrative.[248] Knight and Clarke found the story sometimes difficult to follow—Knight because the third act jumped between separate storylines, and Clarke because he missed important information in the fast-paced plot.[240][246] Kehr and Sight & Sound's Richard Combs wrote that characterization seemed to be less important than special effects, visual spectacle and action set pieces that accomplished little narratively.[247][249] </p>

<p> Reviews were mixed for the principal cast.[241][245][247] Knight wrote that Kershner's direction made the characters more human and less archetypal.[240] Hamill, Fisher, and Ford received some praise, with Champlin calling Hamill "youthfully innocent" and engaging, and Fisher independent.[240][245][250] Arnold described the character progression as less about development and more about "finesse", with little change taking place,[243] while Kehr felt the characters were "stiffer" without Lucas's direction.[247] Knight called Guinness's performance half-hearted,[240] and Janet Maslin criticized Lando Calrissian, the only major black character in the film, as "exaggeratedly unctuous, untrustworthy and loaded with jive".[251] The Chicago Tribune's Gene Siskel said the non-human characters, including the robots and Chewbacca, remained the most lovable creatures, with Yoda being the film's highlight.[252] Knight, Gould Boyum, and Arnold thought Yoda to be incredibly lifelike; Arnold considered his expressions so realistic that he believed an actor's face had been composited onto the puppet.[240][241][243] Canby called the human cast bland and nondescript, and said even the robot characters offered diminishing enjoyment, but Yoda was a success when used sparingly.[239] </p>

<p> Although Arnold praised Kershner's direction, others believed that Lucas's oversight was obvious and Empire lacked Kershner's established directorial sensibilities. Denby described his work as "impersonal" and Canby believed it was impossible to identify what Kershner had contributed.[239][242][243] Combs believed Kershner was an "ill-advised" director because he emphasized the characters, and the result was common tropes at the expense of the comic-strip pace of Star Wars.[249] Peter Suschitzky's cinematography was praised for its visuals and bold color choices,[240][243] and the special effects were lauded as "breathtaking",[241] "ingenious",[240] and visually dazzling.[243] Jim Harwood said he was let down only by the familiarity of the effects from the original, which were emulated by other films.[250] Champlin appreciated that the effects were used to enhance scenes rather than being the focus.[245] </p>

<p> Since their initial release, the Special Editions have been altered multiple times. For the 2004 rerelease, the Clive Revill/Elaine Baker Emperor was replaced by Ian McDiarmid, who had performed the role since Return of the Jedi (1983).[260] Temuera Morrison, who portrayed Fett's clone predecessor in Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), dubbed over Wingreen's lines.[99] Minor changes were made for the 2011 Blu-ray release, including adding flames to the probe droid's impact crater and color modifications.[264][265] The Special Edition releases were controversial with fans, who considered the changes to the original films unnecessary or too substantial.[260][266] The unaltered versions have been commercially unavailable since a 2006 DVD release, which used unrestored footage from an early 1990s Laserdisc release. Harmy's Despecialized Edition is an unofficial fan effort to preserve the unaltered films.[267][268] The 2010 documentary The People vs. George Lucas documents the relationship between the films, their fans, and Lucas.[269] </p>

<p> Lancashire believed that Luke's impatience to leave for Bespin exemplifies his lack of growth from his training.[305] There, Vader tempts him with the power of the dark side and the revelation that he is Luke's father.[285][297] Vader wants Luke's help to destroy the Emperor, not for good, but so that Vader can impose his own order over the galaxy.[285] This admission robs Luke of the idealized image of his Jedi father, reveals Obi-Wan's deception in hiding his parentage, and takes the last of his innocence.[302][309][310] Gerald Clarke suggests Luke is not strong or virtuous enough to resist Vader during this confrontation, and so allows himself to fall into the airshaft below, showing the antagonist does sometimes win.[297][302] The concept of a character having a good father and an evil father is a common story trope because of its simple representations of good and evil.[285] At the film's finale, Luke has a greater understanding of the relationship between good and evil, and the dual nature of people.[311] </p>

<p> Despite the film's initial mixed reception, it has since been reevaluated by critics and fans and is now often considered the best film in the Star Wars series, and one of the greatest films ever made.[m] In 2014, members of the entertainment industry ranked Empire as the 32nd-best film of all time in a poll conducted by The Hollywood Reporter (Star Wars was #11).[327] Empire magazine named it the third-best film of all time, stating that the modern cliché of sequels employing a darker tone can be traced back to Empire.[319] A 1997 retrospective review by Roger Ebert declared the film the best of the original trilogy, praising the depth of its storytelling and its ability to create a sense of wonder in the audience.[328] A vote by 250,000 Business Insider readers in 2014 listed it as the greatest film ever made; it is also included in the 2013 film reference book 1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die.[329][330] The revelation that Vader is Luke's father continues to be seen as one of the greatest plot twists in cinema.[n] Similarly, Han saying "I know" in response to Leia's love confession is considered one of the most iconic scenes in the Star Wars films and one of the more famous lines of improvised dialogue in cinema.[o] </p>

<p> Empire magazine selected the film as the sixth greatest movie sequel, lauding the "bold" unresolved ending and willingness to avoid the same formula as the first film.[342] Den of Geek called it the second-best sequel—after Aliens (1986)—and hailed it as Lucas's "masterpiece".[317] Playboy named it the third-best sequel, describing the disclosure of the relationship between Luke and Vader as the "emotional core that has elevated Star Wars to the pantheon of timeless modern sagas".[318] The BBC and Collider listed it as one of the best sequels ever made,[343][344] while Time and Playboy described it as a sequel that surpasses the original.[318][345] Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes recognizes it as the 27th-best sequel, based on review scores.[346] Rolling Stone's 2014 reader-voted list of the best sequels listed Empire at third.[347] </p>

<p> Landon Palmer, Eric Diaz, and Darren Mooney argue that Empire, and not Star Wars, created the concept of the modern blockbuster film franchise, which includes sequels serving as chapters in an infinitely expanding narrative—a template which was embraced by other film properties in the decades following Empire's release. This new paradigm stood in opposition to the popular trend of exploiting a successful film by creating low-budget sequels (which resulted in diminishing returns, as happened with the Jaws franchise).[365][366][367] Instead, more money was spent on Empire to expand the fictional universe and reap greater box-office returns. The use of a cliffhanger ending to set up a future sequel is seen in many modern films, particularly those in the MCU.[365] It has also been suggested that Empire forged a narrative structure that continues to be emulated in trilogies, wherein the middle film is darker than the original and features an ending in which the protagonists fail to defeat the antagonists (which sets up a subsequent film). Emmet Asher-Perrin and Ben Sherlock cite the series Back to the Future, The Matrix, The Lord of the Rings, and Pirates of the Caribbean as examples.[368][369] </p>

<p> With Palpatine rescued, the Republic presses their advantage, and Yoda and Obi-Wan are sent to the front lines to finish the conflict once and for all. Back on Coruscant, Padmé informs Anakin that she's pregnant, and his dreams become troubled by visions of his wife dying in childbirth. Anakin is also drawn into a game of espionage between Palpatine and the Jedi. The chancellor appoints him as his liaison on the Jedi Council, who request Anakin spy on the chancellor. This doesn't sit well with Anakin, who grows closer to Palpatine, especially after the chancellor hints he might have knowledge that can prevent Padmé's death. To push his plan into its final stages, Sidious reveals himself as a Sith Lord to Anakin. Anakin reports Sidious to Mace Windu, who attempts to arrest the Sith Lord. During the ensuing battle, Anakin chooses to save Sidious, allowing the Sith Lord to murder Mace Windu. </p>

<p> Over time, the small band of resistance leaders met by Han Solo and the Jedi sympathizers aided by Obi Wan Kenobi grow more organized, and the Rebel Alliance begins to take root. Initially, the movement is a guerrilla affair divided into multiple cells, who have little knowledge of each other. One cell, which travels aboard a light freighter named Ghost, consists of ex-Padawan Caleb Dume (now calling himself Kanan Jarrus), Hera Syndulla, C1-10P (aka Chopper), Garazeb Orrelios, Jacen Syndulla, Sabine Wren, and Ezra Bridger, a young Force-sensitive man who becomes Kanan's apprentice. During a mission, Ezra encounters an elderly Maul in an abandoned Sith Temple. Still a physical threat, Maul initially presents himself as an ally. However, it soon becomes apparent he wants to groom Ezra as his new apprentice. Ultimately, Maul tracks down Obi-Wan, who's still watching over Luke Skywalker on Tatooine. When Maul threatens Luke's life, Obi-Wan kills the former Sith Lord — for good this time. </p>

<p> Frustrated by its inability to fully control Mandalore and its people, the Empire launches a campaign against the world that leads to the near-total genocide of the planet's people. Hoping to stop the bloodshed, Bo-Katan relinquishes the Darksaber to Imperial Officer Moff Gideon in exchange for her people's survival. Unsurprisingly, the Empire continues the attack anyway. Later known as the Great Purge of Mandalore or the Night of a Thousand Tears, the Empire's attack decimates Mandalore and scatters surviving Mandalorians across the galaxy without a home. The Empire casts Mandalorian stockpiles of beskar steel into Imperial ingots, thus keeping Mandalorians such as the Children of the Watch from their sacred relics. Even after the destruction of the Second Death Star and the death of Palpatine, remnants of the Empire cling to life. That includes Moff Gideon, who continues to wage war on the Mandalorian people. But his reign doesn't last. </p>

<p> The Star Wars saga has become a sprawling epic, spanning numerous planets, alien races, and massive cosmic battles. In fact, there’s so much stuff happening that sometimes it’s hard to keep it all straight. And that’s why we’re here to explain the entire Star Wars story. The Star Wars story begins during a period of relative peace in the galaxy. A thousand years before the events of the Skywalker Saga, the Jedi Order defeated the Sith Order, seemingly for good. While the Jedi became the keepers of peace in the Galactic Republic, the surviving Sith secretly began plotting to overthrow them. It was near the end of this millennium of peace that Darth Sidious, a Sith Lord who was secretly Senator Sheev Palpatine of Naboo, set in motion his plan to eradicate the Jedi and seize control of the Republic’s government. As part of his plan for galactic domination, Sidious acted as a secret advisor to the Trade Federation, ordering them to blockade and ultimately invade Naboo. Once the Trade Federation arrived on the planet, Sidious slipped back into his Senator Palpatine disguise and advised Naboo’s queen, Padme Amidala, that the current chancellor of the Republic wasn’t acting in their best interests. Working with his his Sith apprentice, Darth Maul, Sidious was able to manipulate and manufacture tensions in the Republic from both sides. Meanwhile, on a mission to protect Amidala, two Jedi Knights, Master Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice, Obi-Wan Kenobi, happened upon a young Anakin Skywalker while repairing their ship on Tatooine. Qui-Gon discovered potentially unprecedented levels of Force sensitivity in the boy. After taking Anakin with them, Qui-Gon urged the Jedi Council to train Anakin, but the Jedi were reluctant. After Qui-Gon’s death at the hands of Darth Maul, the Council accepted Anakin as Obi-Wan’s new apprentice. Palpatine was elected chancellor at Amidala’s urging, granting him a place of unprecedented power to further his plans. Following the events of The Phantom Menace, tensions within the Republic continued to rise under Palpatine’s leadership. Anakin Skywalker grew into a young Jedi Knight of considerable Force talents. And finally, Darth Sidious took on a new apprentice, former Jedi Count Dooku, who adopted the Sith name «Darth Tyranus.» </p>

<p> Rey transmits her coordinates to R2-D2, allowing the Resistance, now led by Poe and Finn, to follow her to Exegol. There, she confronts Palpatine. Debilitated, he demands that she kill him in anger so his spirit can possess her body. The Resistance attacks the Sith fleet, while Ben overpowers the Knights of Ren and joins Rey. Palpatine senses their power as "a dyad in the Force" and drains it to rejuvenate his body. Lando arrives with reinforcements from across the galaxy, including Babu and Zorii. Palpatine incapacitates Ben and attacks the Resistance fleet with Force lightning. Weakened, Rey hears the voices of past Jedi, who give her strength. Palpatine attacks her with lightning, but Rey deflects it using Luke and Leia's lightsabers, destroying him before dying herself. Ben uses the Force to revive Rey, sacrificing himself, and they kiss before he dies. The Resistance destroys the remaining Sith forces, while people across the galaxy rise up against the First Order. </p>

<p> In late April 2017, Disney announced that the film would be released on May 24, 2019.[62] A month later, filming was expected to begin in January 2018.[63] In August 2017, it was announced that Jack Thorne would rewrite the script.[64] On September 5, 2017, Lucasfilm stated that Trevorrow had left the production following creative differences.[65] Trevorrow's place as director was supposedly on ice since June 2017.[66] The Hollywood Reporter reported that his working relationship with Kathleen Kennedy had become unmanageable after failing to deliver a satisfactory script, despite writing several drafts, nor were either happy with Thorne's revisions.[67][68] Johnson was rumored as the top choice to replace Trevorrow as director,[69] but stated "it was never in the plan for me to direct Episode IX."[70] David Fincher had discussions with the studio but would ultimately decline from directing the film.[71][72] </p>

<p> Carrie Fisher, who played General Leia Organa, died on December 27, 2016.[88] Variety and Reuters reported that she had been planned for a key role in Episode IX.[89] In January 2017, Lucasfilm stated that there were no plans to digitally generate Fisher's performance as they had for Rogue One (2016).[90] The following April, Fisher's brother Todd revealed that Fisher's daughter, Billie Lourd, had granted Disney the rights to use recent footage of Fisher.[91] However, a week later, Kathleen Kennedy stated that Fisher would not appear in the film.[92][93] In July 2018, J. J. Abrams announced that unused footage of Fisher from The Force Awakens would be used to help complete the story.[8][9][94][f] In flashback scenes, digital de-aging was used for the appearance of Luke and Leia through the use of facial shots of both characters from the Empire Strikes Back, and Return of the Jedi respectively.[95] In November 2019, prior to the release of the film, Carrie Fisher's brother Todd Fisher, who planned before her death for her character to appear in the film, revealed that "she was going to be the big payoff in the final film" and "she was going to be the last Jedi, so to speak."[96] </p>

<p> In July 2018, Keri Russell was in talks to play a part with some "action-heavy fight scenes",[98] and it was confirmed that Billy Dee Williams would return as Lando Calrissian,[99] onscreen for the first time since 1983's Return of the Jedi — marking one of the longest intervals between portrayals of a character by the same actor in American film history.[97][g] At the end of July, Russell was confirmed to have been cast,[100] and there was an announcement of returning and additional new cast members.[5] In late August, Deadline Hollywood announced that Dominic Monaghan and Matt Smith had been cast in unspecified roles;[101][102] in 2019, Smith denied his involvement,[103][h] but he later clarified that he had been in talks for an unrealized "transformative" part.[106] Early rumors from Making Star Wars claimed Smith was set to portray a "dark side acolyte" who gets possessed by Palpatine.[107][108] Greg Grunberg reprises his role as Temmin "Snap" Wexley.[31] </p>

<p> Principal photography began on August 1, 2018, at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England.[5] Filming also took place in Wadi Rum, Jordan.[112] Oscar Isaac stated that Abrams was allowing more improvised acting than in the previous two films.[113] Due to the tight schedule, some editing took place on set.[114] The crew on The Rise of Skywalker had three fewer months than they had to work on The Force Awakens leading to Maryann Brandon being sent in to cut on set a third of the way through production.[115] Scenes detailing Palpatine's return were altered and changed during production as they were felt to "go off topic".[116] The kiss between Rey and Ben was initially going to be excluded from the film, until Abrams decided against it at the last minute.[117] Principal photography wrapped on February 15, 2019.[118] Footage from the film was shown at The Walt Disney Company's annual shareholders meeting on March 7, 2019.[119] Two weeks of reshoots took place at Pinewood involving Hamill, Ridley, and Isaac in July 2019.[120] Another round of reshoots took place at Bad Robot between late September and mid-October.[121] Abrams stated that the film had fewer reshoots and story adjustments than Episode VII.[122] </p>

<p> Pre-sale tickets went on sale on October 21, 2019, and the film sold more tickets in their first hour of availability on Atom Tickets than the previous record-holder for ticket sales, Avengers: Endgame (2019). It became Atom Tickets' second-best first-day seller of all time behind Endgame, selling more than twice the number of tickets as The Last Jedi sold in that same timeframe, while Fandango reported it outsold all previous Star Wars films.[163][164] Box office tracking had The Rise of Skywalker grossing around $205 million in its opening weekend, though some firms predicted a debut closer to $175 million.[165] The film made $89.6 million on its first day, including $40 million from Thursday night previews, the sixth-highest opening day of all time.[166][167] It went on to debut to $177.4 million, which was the third-highest opening ever for a December release and the 12th-best of all time, and it was also noted that Saturday (which saw a 47% drop from Friday's gross) was the busiest shopping day of the year, likely affecting ticket sales.[168][169][170] However, Deadline Hollywood did write that "we can't ignore the less than platinum B+" audience exit scores, which could affect the film's legs (box office longevity) moving forward.[168] The film made $32 million on Christmas Day, the second-best total ever for the holiday after The Force Awakens' $49.3 million in 2015.[171] It went on to have a five-day total of $138.8 million, including $76 million for the weekend.[172] In its third weekend the film made $34.5 million, remaining in first,[173][174] before being dethroned in its fourth weekend by newcomer 1917 (2019).[175] On January 14, 2020, the film crossed the $1 billion mark at the box office, becoming Disney's seventh film of 2019 to do so.[176] At the end of its box office run, it was third highest-grossing film of 2019 in this region behind Avengers: Endgame and The Lion King.[177] </p>

<p> Scott Mendelson for Forbes described the film as "possibly worse" compared to the previous Skywalker saga films while ending the main saga and "denying this new trilogy its artistic reason for existence". He also criticized the film for retconning The Last Jedi and for its conventional plot twists, writing that the film is full of "patronizing reversals in the name of mollifying the fans who merely want to be reminded of the first three movies."[189] Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times described the film as "a Last Jedi corrective", which is "the more accurate way to describe it" and represents "an epic failure of nerve". He further wrote it "feels more like a retreat, a return to a zone of emotional and thematic safety from a filmmaker with a gift for packaging nostalgia as subversion."[190] Writing for The New Yorker, Richard Brody wrote that the film's faults "are those of the franchise over all", as the film's director "J. J. Abrams is mainly a distiller and a magnifier and brings virtually no originality to it". Brody said that it would have been better if a "boldly imaginative vulgarian such as Michael Bay" had instead created a "derisive wreckage" of Star Wars.[191] Brian Tallerico of RogerEbert.com criticized the film, giving it 2.5/4 stars, faulting it for "Terrible dialogue, disinterested performances, and an unconvincing, phony CGI aesthetic", and criticizing it for its "misdirection" and calling it "A movie that so desperately wants to please a fractured fanbase that it doesn't bother with an identity of its own", though he praised it for its "[r]emarkable set pieces".[192] </p>

<p> ↑ 88.0 88.1 88.2 Star Wars (2015) 7 takes place a year before Star Wars (2015) 15, which is set immediately before Star Wars (2015) 20. In these comics, Owen Lars is visibly older than his appearance in Obi-Wan Kenobi, which Star Wars: Timelines dates the events of to 9 BBY. Additionally, these comics depict Obi-Wan Kenobi in Ben Kenobi's home, a home he did not occupy until after the events of Obi-Wan Kenobi, meaning the comics have to take place after the series. However, Star Wars LINE Webtoon: Chapter 2—"Meeting the Droids" depicts Obi-Wan Kenobi visibly older than his appearance in the aforementioned comics; Star Wars: The Complete Visual Dictionary, New Edition states that Luke Skywalker was twelve years old in the Webtoon chapter, and since he was born in 19 BBY according to Timelines, he was twelve in 7 BBY and this is the latest the comics can take place. Therefore, due to the year-long gap, Star Wars (2015) 7 is set in either 9 BBY or 8 BBY, and Star Wars (2015) 15 and Star Wars (2015) 20 both take place in either 8 BBY or 7 BBY. </p>

<p> After taking a fork-nosed ice worm fossil from Imperial forces on Hoth to sell to the Shadow University through Sava Estat, Chelli Lona Aphra embarks on a job to find the Rings of Vaale, which allegedly grants eternal fortune, immortality, and abilities to rival the most powerful Force user when used together. Doctor Aphra, archaeology student Detta Yao, the bounty hunter Black Krrsantan, and the mercenary "Just Lucky" pursue the rings against Ronen Tagge, scion of the Empire's aristocratic Tagge family. After losing years of research to Tagge at the Ruins of Kolkur, Professor Eustacia Okka and her droid, TA-418, who had done research on the rings, join Aphra aboard the Ark Angel III,[851] traveling to Vaale, Dianth, the home of the The Architects of Vaale who made the rings. They discover murals of High Republic iconography warning that when used independently, one ring would grant eternal life at the cost of the user's madness, while another would grant fortune at the cost of hastening the user's eventual demise.[852] </p>

<p> ↑ Per the reasoning here, the seventh and eighth episodes of The Bad Batch Season 2, "The Clone Conspiracy" and "Truth and Consequences," can be placed in 18 BBY. Therefore, all Season 2 episodes proceeding "The Clone Conspiracy" occur between 19 BBY, which features the end of The Bad Batch Season 1 according to Star Wars: Timelines, and 18 BBY. The Galactic Empire, the formation of which Star Wars: Timelines dates to 19 BBY, sent Mayday's squad to Barton IV over a year prior to the events of the twelfth episode, "The Outpost." As it occurs over a year into the Imperial Era and is set shortly after the events of "Truth and Consequences," the events of "The Outpost" occur around 18 BBY. Following that logic, the ninth through eleventh episodes ("The Crossing" through "Metamorphosis") are also set around 18 BBY because they occur between the events of "Truth and Consequences" and "The Outpost." Finally, all season 2 episodes set after "The Outpost" occur shortly after its events, thereby placing those episodes around 18 BBY as well. </p>

<p> ↑ Thrawn: Treason states that Un'hee is seven years old. The events of Thrawn: Treason takes place shortly after "Rebel Assault" and before "Family Reunion – and Farewell." The epilogue of "Family Reunion – and Farewell" occurs after the end of the Galactic Civil War, which Star Wars: Galactic Atlas dates to 5 ABY, meaning the epilogue must take place during or after that year. "A World Between Worlds" occurs prior to Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, which Galactic Atlas places in 0 BBY, so it must take place during or prior to that year. Star Wars: Women of the Galaxy establishes there is a five years pass between when Ahsoka Tano is saved by Ezra Bridger in "A World Between Worlds" and when she returns to Lothal in the epilogue of "Family Reunion – and Farewell." Therefore, "A World Between Worlds" must be set in 0 BBY. Because "Rebel Assault" is set in the days directly preceding "Rebel Assault," Thrawn: Treason also must take place in 0 BBY. It can then be calculated that Un'hee was born in 7 BBY. </p>

<p> ↑ Star Wars: Timelines dates the events of Phasma to 34 ABY. Phasma takes place a few weeks before the beginning of Galaxy's Edge: Black Spire, which begins during the events of Star Wars: Episode VII The Force Awakens, which is dated to 34 ABY by Star Wars: Galactic Atlas. "Resistance Revisited" – Star Wars Insider 190 establishes that the events of Star Wars Resistance Season One take place thirty years after the Battle of Endor, which corresponds to 34 ABY according to Star Wars: Galactic Atlas, and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary places the beginning of Star Wars Resistance half a year prior to Star Wars: Episode VII The Force Awakens. Therefore, the year 34 ABY begins at least half a year prior to Star Wars: Episode VII The Force Awakens, and since a few weeks is shorter than half a year, Phasma must be set between "The Recruit" and Star Wars: Episode VII The Force Awakens, thereby placing it in 34 ABY. Phasma establishes that Phasma is the same age as Siv, who in a chapter set twelve years before the present day events, is stated to be sixteen. Therefore, Siv and Phasma were both born on Parnassos in 6 ABY. </p>

<p> Chewbacca, known affectionately to his friends as Chewie, was a warrior, smuggler, mechanic, pilot, and resistance fighter who fought in the Clone Wars, the Galactic Civil War, and the Cold War and subsequent First Order/Resistance War. He hailed from the planet Kashyyyk and became a Wookiee military leader. During the Clone Wars, he was captured by Trandoshan slavers and held captive on Wasskah, but he worked with a fellow captive, Jedi Commander Ahsoka Tano, to escape. He later commanded Wookiee forces of the Kachirho Wookiee Militia during the Battle of Kashyyyk alongside the Grand Army of the Republic, led by Jedi General Yoda. During the battle, one of the last ones of the war, Yoda's clone troopers received Order 66 from Supreme Chancellor Palpatine and, with the help of Chewbacca and his fellow Wookiee Chieftain and General Tarfful, Yoda escaped Kashyyyk and the destruction of the Jedi Order. </p>

<p> Rex, formerly designated CT-7567, was a veteran Clone Captain, Clone Commander, and Advanced Recon Commando who commanded the Grand Army of the Republic's famed 501st Legion of clone troopers during the Clone Wars. Rex later served as a captain and commander within the Alliance to Restore the Republic during the Galactic Civil War. Rex participated in many battles over the course of the Clone Wars. As the captain of the 501st, Rex served as second-in-command to Jedi General Anakin Skywalker, whose bravery and unconventionality in battle he came to share. In addition to being a close friend of Skywalker, he also became friends with Skywalker's apprentice, Ahsoka Tano. He was close with Marshal Commander Cody, with their relationship mirroring that of their respective Jedi Generals, Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi, whom Rex was also well acquainted with. Rex and his companions often worked together during the front-line campaigns against the Confederacy of Independent Systems. </p>

<p> Han Solo, known only as Han until being given the surname Solo by an Imperial recruitment officer, and formerly known as Cadet 124-329 while serving as an Imperial cadet, was also a smuggler. He became a leader in the Alliance to Restore the Republic and an instrumental figure in the defeat of the Galactic Empire during the Galactic Civil War. He hailed from Corellia and became a smuggler, even completing the Kessel Run in just twelve parsecs with his prized ship, the Millennium Falcon, and coming under the employ of Jabba the Hutt. He was the son-in-law of fallen Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker and Senator Padmé Amidala, husband of Princess Leia Organa, brother-in-law of Jedi Master Luke Skywalker, father of Ben Solo, rivals and close friends with fellow smuggler Lando Calrissian, and best friends with the Wookiee Chewbacca, his trusted copilot who swore a life debt to the Corellian smuggler. Solo ran afoul of Jabba after ditching a shipment of spice to avoid trouble with the Empire, owing the Hutt a great deal of money as a result. His fortune seemed to have changed when he agreed to charter Luke Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and the droids R2-D2 and C-3PO to Alderaan, but he became caught up in the rebellion against the Empire and, after helping Princess Leia Organa escape from the Death Star, briefly fought in the Battle of Yavin, which allowed Skywalker to destroy the superweapon. Solo fought with the Rebellion for a number of years afterward, taking part in numerous operations and battles against the Empire. </p>

<p> Ben Solo fell to the dark side of the Force as Kylo Ren, master of the Knights of Ren and eventual Supreme Leader of the First Order, but returned to the light side shortly before his death. He was born at the end of the Galactic Civil War in 5 ABY, when the Galactic Empire surrendered to the New Republic. His parents, General Han Solo and Princess Leia Organa, were considered great heroes of the Alliance to Restore the Republic, as was his maternal uncle, Jedi Master Luke Skywalker. The heir to the Skywalker bloodline, Ben Solo possessed raw strength in the Force and had the potential for limitless power. During the New Republic Era, Solo was part of a new generation of Jedi apprentices trained by his uncle. He was seduced by the dark side through the machinations of the phantom Dark Lord of the Sith, Darth Sidious, and his creation, Supreme Leader Snoke. Sidious's son had a daughter, Rey, who was born to her mother in 15 ABY. Unknown to any at the time, Solo and Rey were counterparts as a dyad in the Force. </p>

<p> Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace, is a beautiful opening to perhaps one of the most beautiful space sagas of all-time!! This was George Lucas' attempt to set the stage, and place the characters that would eventually lead to the characters that we grew to know and love in the late 1970's and early 1980's. Now expectations for this film were EXTREMELY high when it was coming out in early 1999, and not everyone liked this film but this reviewer was not one of those people. I was one of the the people that loved it. For the most part, Lucas was given a blank check by Twentieth Century Fox to make this film and if you are to watch it again and just take in the landscapers, settings, costumes, technology, you will see the grand vision that Lucas had behind The Phantom Menace. He did not have these funds and technology at his disposal for his first three Star Wars films. This time he simply did not spare any expense in the prequel films. Israeli-American actress, and Academy Award Winner Natalie Portman changes through numerous costumes in the film, one better than the the other as does her entourage in costumes that are not that far off in terms of looks or expenses from Portman's. I can understand how some fans might be upset at how there are some slow scenes in the film, but it was important for Lucas to set up future action scenes - not to mention future movies - such as the scene where Qui-Gon Jinn (played admirably by Liam Neeson) takes a blood sample from young Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd) to get a midi-chlorian count (a Jedi blood count - something that lets Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan - played very well by Ewan McGregor - know he has Jedi potential). Lucas makes up for this though with outstanding action scenes later in the movie like the desert fight scene between the black clad ninja-like Sith warrior Darth Maul (Ray Park) and Qui-Gon in which the two clash sabers for a couple minutes before Qui-Gon wisely jumps to his ship and the safety of space!! The fact that Star Wars was back, and it was done in a satisfying way that set up future movies was good enough for me!! It had memorable characters, and while not all of these characters survived, they made an imprint on the Star Wars universe that Star Wars fans still cherish today!! Great action, fair acting, good costuming, good sound editing, great soundtrack by legend and genius John Williams, good direction and writing by God and legend George Lucas made this the most artistically beautiful and fun movie of the Star Wars saga!! 8 out of 10 stars!! </p>

<p> Chad Barbry, under the screenname of "Cbarbry," was a regular contributor to Wikipedia since October 17, 2004.[5] So was Steven Greenwood, under the screenname of "Riffsyphon1024," since January 5, 2005.[6] Greenwood soon started sorting the various Star Wars articles on the site. As Wikipedia was concerned, only notable items would have complete articles, with the rest of the minor subjects with descriptions on a giant list. Planets, characters, weapons, and vehicles were all done in this manner. Over a short period of time, Greenwood found that he disliked this format and sought another way to gather and place information on the saga and its Expanded Universe.[7][4] On January 21, Greenwood posted on a section on a talk page regarding the creation of a new Star Wars Portal, but suggested that instead of a portal it should be a wiki, citing Halo Wiki (now Halopedia) as inspiration, as well as TheForce.net's Completely Unofficial Star Wars Encyclopedia.[2] </p>

<p> The character Yaddle was crowned the Star Wars Character of the Year for 2022, with Mitth'ali'astov "Thalias" winning in the imageless category[91] and Tony Gilroy winning 2022's Star Wars Creator of the Year competition.[92] The new year's Wookieepedian of the Month was ArtooD2.[93] On the review panels, LucaRoR and Spookywilloww were voted into the AgriCorps on January 18th and 22nd respectively.[94][95] Spookywilloww was granted administrator rights on the 25th,[96] and Imperators II was elected bureaucrat the following day.[97] On the 31st, UberSoldat93 resigned from his review panel positions.[98] The following month, LucaRoR was inducted into the Inquisitorius on February 21st,[99] and Samonic joined the EduCorps on the 23rd.[100] February's Wookieepedian of the Month was AxMech,[101] and HeadSpikesWalls took the title for the following month.[102] In March, Spookywilloww joined the Inquisitorius on the 5th,[103] and Braha'tok enthusiast and Ayrehead02 also were promoted to the panel on the 25th.[104][105] On March 12, the Wookieepedia administration issued a public apology for the site's failings and problematic attitudes toward past and present members of the community.[21] </p>

<p> For May, newcomer Bonzane10 was voted Wookieepedian of the Month.[116] Samonic was removed from the AgriCorps and EduCorps review panels following his ban on May 10th.[117] On May 18th, Fan26 was promoted to the AgriCorps review panel,[118] and Lewisr joined the EduCorps the same day.[119] On May 23rd, AnilSerifoglu and Cade Calrayn rejoined the admin team, and LucaRoR was also promoted to the position.[120][121][122] Spookywilloww was awarded Wookieepedian of the Month for June, joining the two-timers group.[123] On June 9, Braha'tok enthusiast was granted rollback rights.[124] Sulfur was awarded Wookieepedian of the Month for July.[125] Keelman2001 was elected Wookieepedian of the Month for August.[126] On August 6, Braha'tok enthusiast[127] and NBDani were promoted to administrators.[128] AnilSerifoglu rejoined the AgriCorps on August 9[129] and the Inquisitorius on September 13,[130] and he received his second Wookieepedian of the Month award for October.[131] September's award went to Marvacian Archivist,[132] while October's went to AnilSerifoglu, marking his second time receiving the award.[131] November's Wookieepedian of the Month went to Panther436,[133] while December's went to Cyborg Commando.[134] On December 15th, Panther joined the EduCorps,[135] while OOM rejoined the AgriCorps and Inquisitorius on December 21st.[136][137] </p>

<p> To start the year, January's Wookieepedian of the Month award went to Spongebob456, Wookieepedia's Wiki Representative.[139] The same month, Fan26 joined the Inquisitorius on the 21st.[140] February's Wookieepedian of the Month was DarthSkyll,[141] and March's was Sanathestarr.[142] Panther436 joined the AgriCorps on February 12.[143] ThrawnChiss7 joined the EduCorps on March 14.[144] Ajjviolin96 received the title of Wookieepedian of the Month for April.[145] The same month, Wok142 joined the the EduCorps on the 20th,[146] Tommy-Macaroni rejoined the Inquisitorius on the 11th,[147] and ThrawnChiss7 joined the AgriCorps on the 23rd.[148] Bonzane10 became an administrator on May 18,[149] and ThrawnChiss7 joined the Inquisitorius on May 30.[150] May's Wookieepedian of the Month was False Dimitri,[151] while June's was HK 47, for the second time.[152] On June 6th, Zed42 rejoined the AgriCorps.[153] The Wookieepedian of the Month was CometSmudge for July,[154] who then also joined the EduCorps on the 23rd of the same month.[155] Supreme Emperor resigned from the Social Media Team on July 2, 2024,[156] and three days later, the administration as well.[157] The Wookieepedians of the Month for August and September were Enderdrag64 and MTrac1000.[158][159] Sanathestarr joined the EduCorps on August 1st.[160] CometSmudge was elected as a rollback on October 7,[161] and October's Wookieepedian of the Month was あざした.[162] </p>

<p> On October 1, 2014, @midnight, hosted by Chris Hardwick and with guests Thomas Lennon, Cameron Esposito, and Daniel Sloss, used Wookieepedia in a game titled "NPR Anchor or Minor Star Wars Character." When referring to "the online Star Wars encyclopedia known as Wookieepedia," Hardwick states to the crowd "that's 100% true." In the game, Hardwick asks his contestants whether the names Jad Abumrad, Mas Amedda, and Jian Ghomeshi are NPR anchors or minor Star Wars characters, with Mas Amedda being the only character. Upon reveal, Hardwick displays an image of Amedda from his Wookieepedia article with the Wikia skin present. Hardwick follows this by then viewing Amedda as an NPR anchor wearing an "I love Shelter Cats" sweater. Hardwick also proceeds to view the NPR anchors as Star Wars characters, with Abumrad as C-3PO and Ghomeshi as Emperor Palpatine respectively.[239][240] </p>

<p> In 2006, during the early days of Wookieepedia where less oversight existed,[287] a Wookieepedia editor going by the name Doran added fan translations to the pages of several Mandalorian leaders,[288] roughly attempting[289] to render their names in the Mando'a language.[288] The fanon translations managed to remain up on Wookieepedia and spread across the Mandalorian fandom as if they were confirmed; the alleged Mando'a title of Mandalore the Ultimate, for example, was written and then spread as "Te Ani'la Mand'alor" as if it was official.[290] This culminated in the 2017 canon reference book Star Wars: The Visual Encyclopedia naming a type of Mandalorian tree the trees of Te Ani'la,[291] thereby canonizing part of the Mando'a name for the Ultimate[292] once coined by Doran for wiki aesthetic value.[288] Once brought to the attention of current Wookieepedia editors, the fan-translated name on Mandalore the Ultimate's page was removed due to its basis in speculation,[293] but the tree of Te Ani'la page remains due to its canonical citation.[291] </p>

<p> ↑ Delilah S. Dawson (@delilahsdawson.bsky.social) on Bluesky (post on May 8, 2024): "I looked up 'grenade droid'/'grenadier' on Wookieepedia, confirmed there was one, which you have pictured, and wrote it into the book. If it survived edits without getting cut, then I have to assume that's the one!" (backup link) (In response to: "Afternoon Miss Dawson! I have a really quick question about Rise, loving it as I go through it, and as a battle droid enthusiast I just need to keep track of units in my head :P. […] The Grenade droids are a type of B1, right? Like how the command units mentioned are B1 Command droids (yellow B1s) […] Prior depictions of Grenade Droids have depicted them as a B1 variant, just want to confirm that’s what you were going for […] Basically, asking if I assumed right and your intention was the grenade droid mentioned was one of the B1s they fight) </p>

